Indicators and Considerations for Key Sectors  CLIMATE CHANGE IN AMERICAN SA- MOA
29
P I R C A  2 0 2 1
Effects of Extreme Weather & Climate Change on Key Sectors   
water, increase in insect vectors, barriers 
to receiving medical care, and an increase 
in dehydration and heat stress injuries 
(Choudhary et al. 2012).
• 
Expect more frequent water supply con­
tamination and more frequent floods. 
Heavy rains have periodically caused 
flooding in parts of the Territory, and the 
NWS issues flash flood warnings when 
rainfall rates of more than 2 inches per hour 
are predicted. This is also the approximate 
rainfall rate at which the American Sāmoa 
Power Authority observes groundwater 
wells under the direct influence of surface 
water, or “GUDI” wells, are at risk for 
contamination by pathogens (Shuler et al. 
2019); also this is when there is high flow 
into sewers. On New Year’s Day in 2017, 
flash flooding closed roads, downed power 
lines and trees, and produced landslides. 
Similar floods are expected to become more 
frequent, and flooding will intensify in a 
warmer future climate. In addition to direct 
health risks, heavy rainfall and flooding 
are linked to increased levels of pathogens 
in drinking water and can increase water­
borne disease, such as diarrheal illness 
(Bell et al. 2016; Brunkard et al. 2011). The 
island’s only hospital, Lyndon B. Johnson 
Tropical Medical Center (LBJ Hospital), 
is located near the high-hazard flood zone 
and landslide zone (Jamie Caplan Consult­
ing, LLC 2015). The hospital has flooded 
in the past and will be increasingly at risk 
of flooding and associated problems in the 
future. During King Tides and storm surge, 
travel along the coast and access to medical 
services may be jeopardized. Preparing for 
these challenges is most effectively done 
through a multi-sectoral approach.
• 
Expect stronger tropical cyclones. 
Although they may occur less frequently in 
the future in the Samoan Archipelago, the 
tropical cyclones that do affect American 
Sāmoa are expected to bring stronger 
winds, higher storm surges, and greater 
precipitation amounts. Coral reefs protect 
the shoreline by weakening wave energy. 
Sea level rise and a decline in coral cover 
could reduce the protection from storms. 
Injuries, fatalities, and mental health 
impacts are associated with strong storms, 
especially in vulnerable coastal populations. 
Health risks increase after a storm when 
infrastructure and housing is damaged, and 
electricity, sanitation, safe food and water 
supplies, communication, and transpor-
tation are disrupted. Government and 
non-governmental organizations can 
increase adaptive capacity, for example by 
providing early warning systems, evacua­
tion assistance, and disaster relief (McIver 
et al. 2016; Bell et al. 2016). Federal building 
codes and flood prevention infrastructure 
are often too expensive for vulnerable com­
munities to implement. There is a need for 
less-costly alternatives.
• 
Monitor emerging research on climate and 
vector-borne diseases. American Sāmoa 
experienced outbreaks of dengue and Zika 
in 2016. Dengue, lymphatic filariasis, and 
other mosquito-borne pathogens have 
increased as global health threats in recent 
years (Beard et al. 2016). Researchers are 
concerned that future warming and precipi­
tation changes will increase the suitable 
habitat for pathogens and vectors, thereby 
increasing the potential for instances of 
malaria, dengue fever, diarrhea, salmonel­
losis, and other diseases (Mora et al. 2018). 
Community-level adaptation measures can 
limit human vulnerability to vector-borne 
disease (Beard et al. 2016; Radke et al. 2012; 
Reiter et al. 2003). 
