Indicators and Considerations for Key Sectors  CLIMATE CHANGE IN AMERICAN SA- MOA
3
P I R C A  2 0 2 1
Key Issues for Managers 
and Policymakers
Increasing air temperatures – Hot days 
have increased, while the frequency of 
cool nights has decreased in American Sa-moa. Air 
temperatures will continue to rise under all future 
warming scenarios. 
More extreme rainfall and flooding – 
Extreme rainfall events are projected to 
become more frequent and intense for American 
Sa-moa, increasing runoff and the risk of flooding.
Uncertain rainfall amounts – There is 
uncertainty in how total rainfall will change 
this century in American Sa-moa. The majority 
of climate models project only small changes in 
future rainfall amounts, although some project 
changes of up to 20% in either direction. A wetter, 
drier, or unchanged future climate is possible.
Coral reef bleaching and loss – Oceans 
are warming, causing coral reef bleaching 
to become more frequent and severe in the Territory. 
Coral reefs and ocean ecosystems contribute 
millions of dollars annually to American Sa-moa’s 
economy and provide natural protection from 
floods and storms.
Sea level rise – Global and local sea level 
rise has accelerated. Land subsidence (the 
sinking of Earth’s surface) from a major earth­
quake in 2009 compounds the effects of sea level 
rise and associated coastal erosion. Sea level rise 
is also affecting the groundwater table in coastal 
plains, already infiltrating drinking water supplies. 
Currently, sea level rise inhibits crops, such as the 
Aunu‘u taufusi (wet-cropped taro), in some low-
lying areas.
Equity considerations – Climate change 
is expected to disrupt many aspects of life 
in American Sa-moa, and some groups will likely 
be affected disproportionately. Those who are 
already vulnerable, such as children, elderly 
people, people with pre-existing medical con­
ditions, and low-income communities, as well as 
those living in villages located in low-lying coastal 
or rural areas, are at greater risk from extreme 
weather and climate events. Traditional systems of 
land and marine tenure complicate relocation out 
of ancestral areas, and communities do not want to 
be separated from their lands and waters.
Threats to community health – Changes 
in rainfall and drying patterns are likely 
to lead to increased mosquito populations, which 
can increase communities’ exposure to mosquito-
borne illnesses such as dengue, Zika, chikungunya, 
and lymphatic filariasis. These diseases dispropor­
tionately affect people living without screens on 
their windows, or without the means to seal their 
houses, and near objects that collect rainwater.
Risks to fresh water – Hotter temperatures 
increase the demand for water and decrease 
the fresh water available.  Additionally, sea level 
rise threatens many groundwater systems in 
low-elevation areas. Increasing knowledge and 
awareness among community members about 
how water systems may be impacted, and com­
munication among agencies and sectors that 
manage water, have the potential to boost 
resilience to climate change and other shocks 
and stressors.
Threats to ecosystems and biodiversity – 
Changes in temperature, rainfall, and 
storminess promote the spread of invasive 
species and reduce the ability of marine and 
terrestrial habitats to support rare and protected 
species. Measures that enhance biodiversity 
and improve ecosystem resilience can help 
communities to adapt.
Threats to infrastructure – More frequent 
and severe coastal flooding and increased 
coastal erosion are affecting coastal properties 
and infrastructure. These issues will be amplified in 
the coming decades as sea level rise continues to 
accelerate.
