Indicators and Considerations for Key Sectors  CLIMATE CHANGE IN AMERICAN SA- MOA
45
P I R C A  2 0 2 1
confidence in the projected amount of average 
temperature change.
Rainfall – Missing data in the long-term record 
is an ongoing challenge. This happens when 
observations recorded at stations are not trans­
mitted to NOAA’s National Weather Service and 
National Centers for Environmental Informa­
tion archives. Airport stations are more reliable 
because data is transmitted hourly via satellite 
(Marra and Kruk 2017). See location of selected 
Pacific region precipitation measurement 
sites (Marra and Kruk 2017, Fig. 3.4). Extreme 
rainfall is denoted as the number of days per 
year in which total rainfall exceeded 1.5 inches.
There is less certainty in the CMIP5 models as 
to the direction of projected change in average 
annual rainfall than found previously (and 
reported in CSIRO’s 2011 reports) (Australian 
BOM and CSIRO 2014; Brown et al. 2020). 
There is high confidence that the frequency and 
intensity of extreme rainfall events will increase 
under both the lower scenario (RCP 4.5) and 
the higher scenario (RCP 8.5) because: (a) a 
warmer atmosphere can hold more moisture, 
so there is greater potential for extreme rainfall 
(IPCC 2012); and (b) increases in extreme 
rainfall in the Pacific are projected in all avail-
able climate models. However, there is low 
confidence in the magnitude of these changes 
(Australian BOM and CSIRO 2014). There is 
one set of dynamically downscaled climate pro­
jections available for American Sāmoa (Zhang 
et al. 2016). Those projections indicate an 
increase in annual average precipitation of 11% 
and 18% in the RCP8.5 and RCP4.5 scenarios, 
respectively, by 2100. There is low confidence 
in those projections. 
Drought – The frequency and duration of 
drought events is expected to remain approx­
imately the same under the higher scenario 
(RCP 8.5). The overall proportion of time spent 
in drought in Sāmoa is expected to remain 
stable, except for a slight decrease under a 
very low (RCP 2.6) scenario (low confidence) 
(Australian BOM and CSIRO 2014). 
Streamflow – There is only a single streamflow 
record available for American Sāmoa from the 
USGS Pacific Islands Water Science Center with 
more than 35 years of record that is unaffected 
by artificial diversions (Keener et al. 2012). The 
Atauloma Stream gauge on the island of Tutuila 
showed a slight and insignificant downward 
trend from 1959 to 1997 (Keener et al. 2012), 
which does not provide enough information to 
determine a significant long-term trend. There is 
low confidence that projected increases in rainfall 
will cause increased streamflow and runoff 
relative to historic levels (Zhang et al. 2016; 
Shuler et al. 2021).
Tropical cyclones and storms – The future is 
less certain for tropical cyclones than other 
elements. The environmental conditions to 
produce a cyclone are at timescales much 
shorter than global climate model simulations; 
for example, the state of ENSO and the 
intensity and phase of the Madden-Julian 
Oscillation (Diamond et al. 2013). There is a 
medium level of confidence that global tropical 
cyclone frequency will decrease (USGCRP 
2017). In the area surrounding Sāmoa, there 
is high confidence that there will be a decrease 
in tropical cyclone frequency (Chapter 12, 
Australia BOM and CSIRO 2014). Recent 
studies detect increasing trends in tropical 
cyclone intensity in observations from 1979 
to 2017 and raise confidence in projections 
of increased tropical cyclone intensity with 
continued warming (Kossin et al. 2020).
Sea level – The long-term sea level trend for 
American Sāmoa is positive, likely indicating 
sea level rise. The relative sea level trend at 
the Pago Pago Harbor, Tutuila, is equivalent to 
Traceable Accounts   
