Indicators and Considerations for Key Sectors  CLIMATE CHANGE IN AMERICAN SA- MOA
19
P I R C A  2 0 2 1
Indicators of Climate Change in American Sa-moa   
Sea level rise poses many challenges to island 
communities and infrastructure because it 
brings more frequent and extreme coastal 
erosion, coastal flooding, and saltwater 
intrusion into coastal aquifers. A great deal of 
American Sāmoa’s infrastructure is located on 
the narrow band of flat land along the coast, 
making it highly vulnerable. The South Pacific 
experiences large fluctuations in sea level from 
year to year related to basin-scale processes 
such as El Niño. Sea levels also vary annually 
due to the seasonal ocean temperature cycle 
and on shorter timespans due to abrupt changes 
in winds and atmospheric pressure (in the case 
of storm surges). Despite this variability, the 
average sea level is increasing over decades and 
this increase is projected to accelerate in the 
coming decades.  


Relatively small changes in average sea level 
can have large effects on tidal flood frequency. 
In Pago Pago and other areas around Tutuila, 
land subsidence and sea level rise have caused 
high tide flooding (also called nuisance coastal 
flooding) to become more common. On 
June 23, 2017, the NOAA tide gauge in Pago 
Pago recorded a daily maximum water level of 
1.3 feet (41 cm) above the Mean Higher High 
Water (MHHW) level during the 1983 to 2001 
tidal epoch, and residents reported coastal 
flooding. Since 2014, the water level exceeded 
that same level during at least 20 days every 
year, whereas prior to the 2009 earthquake 
there was only one such daily observation. 
During 2019, 90 days exceeded the level at 
which flooding was observed. Changes in sea 
level coupled with high tide events can also 
exacerbate coastal erosion problems, although 
local erosion data is lacking.
Sea level
Indicator
How has it changed?
Projected future change
Sea level


Tidal flood frequency


the potential for severe damage (Widlansky 
et al. 2019).
Globally, tropical cyclone frequency shows 
a slow downward trend since the early 1970s. 
The number of tropical cyclones is projected to 
decrease across the Pacific and globally by the 
late 21st century (Kossin et al. 2016; USGCRP 
2017). In the area surrounding American 
Sāmoa and the southeast Pacific basin, the 
future projection is for an overall decrease in 
the occurrence of tropical cyclones, ranging 
between 5% and 50%, with high confidence 
(Australian BOM and CSIRO 2014; Wang et al. 
2016). Thus, the overall outlook is for fewer but 
stronger storms in the future. 
From 1981 to 2015, the frequency of gale-force 
winds has increased in the central south 
Pacific. Gale-force winds are responsible for 
moderate to high waves, which impede boating 
(Marra and Kruk 2017; Kanamitsu et al. 2002). 
Furthermore, strong winds create choppy 
seas and push water inland, causing increased 
coastal erosion and flooding (see Fig. 4.2 in 
Marra and Kruk 2017).
