CLIMATE CHANGE IN AMERICAN SA- MOA  Indicators and Considerations for Key Sectors
38
P I R C A  2 0 2 1
 Effects of Extreme Weather & Climate Change on Key Sectors
• 
Coastal historical and cultural sites 
will likely be affected by erosion, storm 
surge, and coastal inundation from sea 
level rise. Significant ancient villages and 
World War II historical sites exist across 
American Sāmoa. Although it is not known 
how climate change will specifically affect 
individual archeological and cultural 
sites, coastal areas will likely be affected 
by erosion, storm surge, and coastal 
inundation from sea level rise (Addison 
et al. 2010). For example, Fagatele Bay 
features a historic coastal village occupied 
from prehistoric times through the 1950s. 
The Bay contains one of the few marine 
archaeological records in the territory: 
grinding holes or bait cups, known as 
foaga, carved by ancient Samoans into the 
shoreline along the reef edge (Leach and 
Witter 1985; US Department of Commerce 
2012). Increased coastal erosion threatens 
these and other significant cultural sites in 
American Sāmoa.
• 
Climate change exacerbates challenges to 
the continued availability of cultural foods 
and medicinal plants. Changes in environ­
mental conditions such as warming oceans, 
reduced streamflow, saltwater intrusion, 
and long periods of drought threaten the 
ongoing cultivation of coconut and the 
availability of traditional foods such as fish, 
other seafood, and edible seaweed (Keener 
et al. 2018). The distribution and presence 
of medicinal plants may be impacted by 
changing temperature and rainfall regimes 
(ASCC 2010), while increasing imports of 
staple foods such as banana and taro may be 
needed.
• 
Climate change may necessitate village 
relocations and change village structure. 
Pacific Islanders, including American 
Samoans, have an inseparable connection 
to and derive their sense of identity from 
the lands, territories, and resources of 
their islands (Keener et al. 2018). Tradi­
tional systems of land and marine tenure 
complicate relocation out of ancestral 
areas, and communities do not want to 
be separated from their lands and waters, 
which also complicates Federal Emergency 
Management Agency (FEMA) assistance 
funding that may be contingent upon 
relocation. Coastal or remote villages may 
be more vulnerable to these impacts.  
If you are a cultural or historical resources steward…
Countries with greater insurance coverage 
across sectors are found to experience 
better GDP growth after weather-related 
catastrophes (Melecky and Raddatz 2011). 
There are an array of options to manage 
climate-related risks, such as weather-
indexed insurance products and risk 
transfer-for-adaptation programs. Some 
cities and states have bought catastrophe 
bonds or parametric insurance policies. 
For example, the government of Quintana 
Roo, Mexico, purchased a parametric policy 
that would provide up to $3.8 million to 
repair hurricane damage to their coral 
reef (Gonzalez 2019). This kind of policy 
provides a fast payout to quickly address 
impacts from a triggering event. 
