CLIMATE CHANGE IN AMERICAN SA- MOA  Indicators and Considerations for Key Sectors
28
P I R C A  2 0 2 1
If you work in public health or disaster management…
• 
Account for the consequences of climate 
change at multiple levels across the health 
sector. Climate change and extreme events 
are anticipated to affect individuals and 
communities as well as healthcare facili­
ties and public infrastructure. When they 
overlap with disease outbreaks, weather 
extremes can disrupt the public health 
sector’s response, as during the COVID-19 
pandemic. Adaptation actions at multiple 
scales are needed to prepare for and 
manage health risks in a changing climate 
(USGCRP 2018, Ch. 14, KM3).  
• 
Prepare for more frequent extreme heat 
events that are expected to increase 
heat-related illness. Even small increases 
in seasonal average temperatures can 
increase extremes, and in some places 
are observed to result in illness and 
death. Some groups have a higher risk of 
becoming ill or dying due to extreme heat, 
including people with chronic illnesses, 
older adults, and children (Sarofim et al. 
2016). Rising temperatures can also affect 
the management of non-communicable 
diseases, including diabetes, since hot 
weather makes it uncomfortable and even 
unsafe to exercise outside. To assess the 
risks of rising air temperatures and other 
climatic changes on local health, the US 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 
developed the “Building Resilience Against 
Climate Effects” (BRACE) framework (CDC 
2019), which could be used to inform local 
climate and health strategies in American 
Sāmoa (Marinucci et al. 2014). Shock 
events can exacerbate existing heat and 
socioeconomic stressors. After the 2009 
tsunami, compounding impacts at different 
scales included lack of electricity and fresh 
 Effects of Extreme Weather & Climate Change on Key Sectors
Floodwaters, like those pictured here in Nu‘uuli after heavy rain, carry pathogens and pose a direct risk to safety. 
Heavy rains and flooding can threaten homes, close roads, down powerlines and trees, and cause landsides. 
Such floods become more likely as the climate warms. Photo by Valentine Vaeoso.
