CLIMATE CHANGE IN AMERICAN SA- MOA  Indicators and Considerations for Key Sectors
32
P I R C A  2 0 2 1
If you are involved in fisheries or managing ocean resources...  
• 
Coral reefs in American Sāmoa have 
already experienced increased frequency 
of bleaching. In the next few decades, 
more frequent coral bleaching events and 
ocean heatwaves will combine with other 
stressors such as erosion, sedimentation, 
pollution, and overfishing to increasingly 
threaten coral reefs and the livelihoods they 
support. The overall value of coral reefs 
is estimated to be at least $10 million per 
year in American Sāmoa (US Department 
of Commerce 2012). By 2040, widespread 
coral bleaching and mortality is projected to 
occur annually (van Hooidonk et al. 2016). 
Some populations of staghorn corals in 
backreef pools were observed to have partial 
colony bleaching annually since 2003 and 
have recovered (Fenner and Heron 2009; 
Fenner 2019). However, repeated or extreme 
global ocean heatwaves are linked to local 
coral death. The identification, cultivation, 
and out planting of resilient corals can be 
a locally effective management strategy 
(Score 2017), although it should not be 
viewed as a panacea—even farmed corals 
will be challenged by high temperatures, and 
storms can damage farms. Greenhouse gas 
emissions reductions on a global scale may 
aid the survival of resilient corals locally. 
Studies have found that reefs with the 
highest future resilience potential are in geo­
graphically defined zones, with northeastern 
Tutuila scoring the highest, northwest and 
southwest zones rated as having interme­
diate resilience, and southeastern Tutuila 
scoring the lowest (Schumacher et al. 2018). 
 Effects of Extreme Weather & Climate Change on Key Sectors
Coral reefs experienced bleaching from high water temperatures in 2020. Here, staff from the 
Coral Reef Advisory Group (CRAG) are shown monitoring coral bleaching in pools at Ta-funa. 
Photo by Valentine Vaeoso, July 17, 2020. 
