Indicators and Considerations for Key Sectors  CLIMATE CHANGE IN AMERICAN SA- MOA
13
P I R C A  2 0 2 1
Greenhouse gas emissions from human activi­
ties will continue to affect the climate over this 
century and beyond; however, efforts to cut 
emissions of certain gases could help reduce 
the rate of global temperature increases over 
the next few decades (USGCRP 2018, Ch. 1: 
Overview and Ch. 2, KM 2). 
Globally, the largest uncertainty in projecting 
future climate conditions is the level of future 
greenhouse gas emissions, which could vary 
widely depending on the actions that human 
society takes in the coming years (USGCRP 
2018, Ch. 2, KM 2; IPCC 2014, SMP.2.1). In 
American Sāmoa, future changes in rainfall 
are also highly uncertain. Climate models 
representing our understanding of historical 
and current climate conditions are often used 
to project how our world will change under 
future conditions. To understand how different 
levels of greenhouse gas emissions could lead 
to different climate outcomes, scientists use 
plausible future scenarios to project tempera­
ture change and associated impacts (USGCRP 
2018, Guide to the Report). In this summary, 
the “high scenario” represents a future where 
reliance on fossil fuels and annual greenhouse 
gas emissions continue to increase throughout 
this century. The “low scenario” is based on 
reducing greenhouse gas emissions (about 85% 
lower emissions than the high scenario by the 
end of the 21st century).  
Current greenhouse gas emissions far outpace 
lower emissions pathways and are currently 
tracking higher than the high scenario (RCP8.5). 
Human activities have caused approximately 
1.8°F/1.0°C of warming above pre-industrial 
levels (IPCC 2018, A.1). Limiting global warming 
to 2.7°F/1.5°C, while physically possible, would 
require rapid and far-reaching transitions in 
energy, land use, cities, transportation, and 
industrial systems (IPCC 2018, C.2).
This report summarizes the observed changes 
and future projections in key climate indicators 
in American Sāmoa. Later sections describe 
climate-related issues affecting families and 
households; extreme weather and climate 
change risks and considerations for managers 
and decision-makers; and needs for informa­
tion and research. The findings are drawn 
from published literature on climate science, 
climate-related risks in the Pacific Islands, and 
risk management approaches. The American 
Sāmoa Community College and the Pacific RISA 
held a workshop in June 2019 that gathered 
knowledge, informed the report content, and 
identified research and information needs.
Future changes
Global Climate Change: Causes and Indicators   
