CLIMATE CHANGE IN AMERICAN SA- MOA  Indicators and Considerations for Key Sectors
36
P I R C A  2 0 2 1
 Effects of Extreme Weather & Climate Change on Key Sectors
• 
Changes in temperature, rainfall, and 
storminess promote the spread of invasive 
species and reduce the ability of terrestrial 
habitats to support protected species. 
Lowland deforestation, landslides, erosion, 
runoff, and invasive alien plants and animals 
threaten American Sāmoa’s native rainforest 
ecosystems. American Sāmoa’s forests have 
low-to-medium plant and animal species 
diversity, and are home to several protected 
animal species, as well as endemic and 
rare trees and other culturally important 
plants. Changing climatic conditions pose an 
additional risk to native plants and animals 
(ASCC 2010). 
• 
Expect declining ocean ecosystem health. 
Watershed conservation measures can 
protect refugia for coral populations. 
American Sāmoa has experienced signifi­
cant outbreaks of crown-of-thorns (COTS) 
sea stars in the last several decades and as 
recently as 2015, which damaged local reefs. 
Successful eradication efforts have largely 
controlled COTS populations, but increases 
in storms and nutrient runoff could increase 
them again (Clark 2013), which in turn 
would damage reefs and decrease beach 
protection.
• 
Measures that protect and enhance bio-
diversity and ecosystem services are critical 
to support communities in adapting to 
climate change. Natural resources underpin 
the sustenance and resilience of Pacific Island 
communities (Barnett and Campbell 2010). 
For example, mangrove forests can provide 
storm protection and building materials, 
and are productive estuaries (Victor et al. 
2004). Significant portions of mangrove 
forests have been lost to human land use in 
American Sāmoa; only five stands across 
two islands remain, and replanting has had 
varying success (EcoAdapt 2016). Despite 
existing policies, clearing and cutting already 
threaten mangroves, which will be addition­
ally stressed by projected climate impacts 
such as storm surge, extreme high-water 
levels, changing precipitation patterns, and 
sea level rise (Gilman et al. 2008; Gilman et 
al. 2006). Restoring mangrove forests, as is 
being done in Leone on Tutuila, can help to 
protect communities against storm surge and 
coastal inundation, enabling them to adapt, 
while also providing secondary benefits such 
as maintenance of fisheries (US Department 
of Commerce 2012; Hills et al. 2013). 
If you manage ecosystems and biodiversity…
• 
Erosion of beaches and shoreline areas will 
increase. Coastal erosion and beach loss are 
already issues in American Sāmoa, and certain 
erosion-control structures (such as seawalls) 
have the unintended consequence of beach 
loss and ecosystem damage when installed 
on chronically eroding sandy shorelines. 
Alternative erosion control practices include 
protecting and restoring coral reefs, using 
vegetative buffers, and augmenting sand in 
specific areas. Even with the potential for 
negative effects on beaches and ecosystems, 
hard engineered shoreline protection may be 
necessary in some instances to protect critical 
infrastructure. 
