Indicators and Considerations for Key Sectors  CLIMATE CHANGE IN AMERICAN SA- MOA
P I R C A  2 0 2 1
Climate Change in American Sa-moa: 
Indicators and Considerations for 
Key Sectors is a report developed by 
the Pacific Islands Regional Climate 
Assessment (PIRCA). It is one in a series 
of reports aimed at assessing the state 
of knowledge about climate change 
indicators, impacts, and adaptive 
capacity of the US-Affiliated Pacific 
Islands (USAPI) and the Hawaiian 
archipelago. PIRCA is a collaborative 
effort engaging federal, state, and local 
government agencies, non-governmental 
organizations, academia, businesses, 
and community groups to inform and 
prioritize their activities in the face of a 
changing climate.
The initial phase of PIRCA activities was conducted 
during June-October 2019 and included meetings 
and workshops in American Sa-moa, the Republic of 
Palau, the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana 
Islands (CNMI), and Guam. Draft PIRCA reports were 
developed and refined through engagement with the 
PIRCA network. The material presented in this report 
is based largely on published research and insights 
from participants in PIRCA activities. The PIRCA 
Advisory Committee reviewed this report. Workshop 
participants and reviewers independent of the PIRCA 
workshops who made contributions are recognized 
as Technical Contributors.
The Pacific Regional Integrated Sciences and 
Assessments (Pacific RISA) program has primary 
oversight of the 2020-2021 PIRCA. The Pacific 
RISA is funded by the US National Oceanic and 
Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) and supported 
through the East-West Center. Key partners and 
supporters are NOAA’s National Centers for Envi­
ronmental Information (NCEI), the Department of the 
Interior’s Pacific Islands Climate Adaptation Science 
Center (PI-CASC), and the US Global Change 
Research Program (USGCRP).
This series represents the latest assessment in a 
sustained process of information exchange among 
scientists, businesses, governments, and communities 
in the Pacific Islands region that began with the 2012 
PIRCA (which produced Climate Change and Pacific 
Islands: Indicators and Impacts, Island Press). We 
anticipate that in conjunction with other collaborative 
regional assessment efforts, the PIRCA reports will 
provide guidance for decision-makers seeking to 
better understand how climate variability and change 
impact the Pacific Islands region and its peoples.
About PIRCA 
and this Report 
The PIRCA Advisory Committee
Kristie Ebi, University of Washington Environmental and Occupational Health Sciences; Yimnang Golbuu, 
Palau International Coral Reef Center; Jamie Gove, NOAA Fisheries; Mari-Vaughn V. Johnson, Pacific 
Islands Climate Adaptation Science Center; Heather Kerkering, Pacific Islands Climate Adaptation Science 
Center; William Kostka, Micronesia Conservation Trust; Darren T. Lerner, University of Hawai‘i Sea Grant 
College Program; Ambassador Karena Lyons, New Zealand; John J. Marra, NOAA National Centers for 
Environmental Information; Dan Polhemus, US Fish and Wildlife Service
