38 Section I A. L. DaHL

The species composition of Samoan algal In the turf community, Fania, Laurencia, or
turfs is both complex and highly variable. | Hypnea may serve a similar anchoring func-
One sample of about 400 mm? from a basal- _ tion for other algae, or even for the substrate.
tic substrate at Lepisi Point contained over In one area of loose rubble on the reef flat
30 species. Some species occur only in turfs; | near Anapeapea, the coral fragments have
others are found elsewhere, often growing in —_ been bound together by turf to form.a dense
turf in a reduced form. Some of the do- _ resilent mat. Such binding might foster the
minant turf genera include Jania, Polysiphonia, consolidation of the rubble into reef rock by
Ceramium, Hypnea, Cladophora, Gelidium, and  coralline algae or chemical processes.
Laurencia. A detailed listing of the algae One might also expect certain algae with
present is beyond the scope of this paper. greater resistance to grazing or abrasion to

serve as a shelter for more delicate forms. The
Discussion dense turf form could similarly provide pro-
tection from extreme light intensities or ex-

How do such complex associations as the posure, producing an internal microhabitat
algal turf community arise. and what signi- = more favorable to survival and growth.
ficance do they have in the reef ecosystem? There may also be nutritional, antibiotic, or
From the present monitoring surveys, it is other biochemical benefits within the close
only possible to conclude that such turfs are — confines of the community. A dense turf
widespread and are frequently composed of association may be better able to regenerate
numerous species in close association. It rapidly after injury, or to change its species
may be useful to suggest possible contribut- composition with changing conditions. It is,
ing factors, but detailed experimental con- jp all likelihood, a dynamic rather than static
firmation will be required. association.

First, a number of features can be noted The significance of algal turfs for the whole
about the turf habitat. It would appear to yeef ecosystem is similarly open to conjec-
have high potential for productivity, with ture. This may well be an area of high pro-
ample light and a supply of nutrients washed — ductivity, in which rapid growth is balanced
onshore by reef currents and carried down py heavy grazing, resulting in low biomass
from the adjacent land. There would also hut high turnover. Turfs may also control
be high grazing pressure, at least intermit- substrate availability, preventing the settle-
tently when high tides permit grazing fish — ment of coral larvae and other organisms.
and other animals to emerge or to come The widespread occurrence of algal turfs
inshore from the outer reef. At least some in tropical reef habitats suggests that they
turf areas are subject to exposure at low tide, may play a significant part in reef structure
as well as to environmental extremes such as and function. Not until the roles of this and
high light intensity, and salinity variations other rcef communities are more fully ex-
with heavy rains and freshwater runoff. plored will we begin to understand the com-

There may well be species interactions plex ecosystem that is a coral reef.
within the turf community that help to count-
er these ecological pressures. For example, REFERENCES
the entrance to Pala Lagoon near Nuuuli
consists largely of broad shallow sand flats 1. Gislén, Torsten, 1929/30. Epibioses of the Gull-
carpeted with a simple association of Halimeda mar Fjord, I. Geomorphology and hydrography.
and Dictyota. A dense mat of Dictyota and Il. _Marine sociology. (Kristinebergs Zoologiska
scattered Padina largely covers the area, Station, 1877-1927). SkrSer. Ky. sevenska Vetensk.

. . Akad, 3: 1-123; 4: 1-380.
anchored in place by hummocks of Halimeda. 2. Mayor, Alfred G. 1920, The reefs of Tutuila,
The Halimeda provides the only firm attach- Samoa, in their relation to coral reef theories. Proc.
ment in the sand for the Dictyota, the Dictyota Amer. Phil. Soc. 59: 224-36.
alters conditions under the mat in a way that 3. Neushul, Michael, and Dahl, Arthur L. 1967.
may or may not be beneficial to the Halimeda. Composition and growth of subtidal parvosilvosa
3
