TROPICAL REEF ALGAE IN SAMOA ; 37
will be required before any generalizations adjacent carbonate rock substrate. For fur-
about the turf community can be substan- __ ther information on the structure of the reefs
tiated. It is nevertheless useful to consider at Tutuila, see Mayor (2).
this association as a unit with respect to its A profile of the reef site near Nuuuli (Fig.
role in coral reef ecosystems. 1) illustrates several of the features of the

Little information has been published on Samoan reef flat habitats. The inshore area
the marine algae of American Samoa. The _ consists largely of sand and a loose coral
paper by Setchell is perhaps the most sub- rubble of fragments less than 100 mm long.
stantial, yet it was apparently based on Scattered small coral heads towards the sea-
fragmentary collections and is incomplete (5). ward edge of the moat merge into the solid

reef flat extending to the outer edge of the

Rest reef. Semiconsolidated calcareous rubble
ESULTS . . .

predominates on the inner portion of the

The fringing reefs around Tutuila Island, reef flat with an increasing percentage of
American Samoa, are relatively small, ex- living coral towards the reef front. Algal
tending no more than a few hundred meters _ turfs cover most of the available solid sur-
from the shore. On the south shore, the face in the reef moat with fleshy crusts also
reefs extend for most of the length of the common on coral fragments. Turfs de-
island and generally consist of a shallow crease in coverage toward the outer margin
moat near the shore (200 to 400 mm depth _ of the reef flat to be replaced by crustose
at low tide), a relatively solid reef flat ex- | formsand then living coral. Halimeda opuntia
tending out perhaps 100 m., which is barely is common in the interstices of the rubble on
exposed by the lower tides, and the reef front the reef flat.
itself (Fig. 1). Living corals occur primarily In terms of percent coverage, turfs are fre-
on the outer portion of the reef flat and be- —_ quently the most significant algal component
yond. Breaks in the reef are generally as- _in shallow reef areas. On some other tran-
sociated with areas of freshwater runoff. sects, the relative role of encrusting coralline
Reef development on the north shore is algae increased, particularly on loose coral
primarily restricted to the bays. All the rubble and on the outer margin of the reef,
reefs tend to be highly variable in structure but turf remained dominant in the more
and dominant organisms, depending on the _ stable areas. Extensive turfs were also noted
local conditions. The flora of the basaltic along subtidal channels and on the dead
outcrops was distinctly different from that of portions of coral heads.

NUUULI REEF FLAT

coals - - —-— m™ 0
Fleshy .
cute —_—_—_—_— $
Coralline A eee 8
crusts w
Halide entas nresttveen came tT nea &
Mh _ Sh o
Turfs &
fed ——_ vf \

at sand with semi-consolidated living corals
coral rubble coral rubble £
‘ 2
a OS OS 7

6) 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90

Meters
’ Fig. 1. Profile of the reef flat near Nuuvuli, Tutuila Island, American Samoa, showing the
percent coverage of the dominant forms.
