 
6 
 
In this report, we are combining Pavona varians s.l. with P. chiriquiensis data because P. 
chiriquiensis was only recently described (Appendix 1, Taxonomic Notes) and data were not 
distinquished between them in earlier years. They appear to have very similar ecological roles 
and preferred environmental conditions. We will combine them under the name Pavona varians 
s.l. The “s.l.” stands for “sensu lato” which means Pavona varians “in the broad sense”. 
                                                                        Results 
Population densities of coral colonies 
It is surprising that overall, despite the severe cyclones, bleaching, crown-of-thorns outbreaks, 
and other events that have caused major damages to many coral communities on time-scales of 
years approaching decades, the abundances or population densities of all coral colonies has not 
changed significantly overall (Fig. 2A) during the years between 1982 and 2024 (42 years) for all 
the sites around Tutuila and Aunu’u (19 sites after excluding Pago Pago Harbor and FBNMS). 
The same can be said for the coral communities along the six sets of permanent transects in 
Fagatele Bay (Fig. 2B). Although the total abundance or population density of all species of coral 
colonies for all sites has not changed, the changes in size distributions and the reassortment of 
relative abundances of coral genera and species have produced important changes in community 
structure of corals over these 42 years. 
It was also a surprise to find the average population densities of coral colonies on the open coast 
of Tutuila (12.8 ± 8.28 colonies m-2) to be significantly greater (p < 0.05, t-test df 351) than the 
population densities of coral colonies in FBNMS (11.0 colonies ± 7.42 m-2). The coral colony 
population densities on Rose Atoll (12.5 ± 8.35 colonies m-2) were also larger than in FBNMS 
(11.0 colonies m-2), but not significantly (p = 0.13, t-test df 199). The mean densities and 
standard deviations of outer coast Tutuila and Rose Atoll are so similar, that it is unbelievable 
that one was significantly different from Fagatele Bay and the other was not. We carefully 
repeated the analysis, but the same results continue to be found. Calculations of living coral 
cover based on proportions of colonies among size distributions (explained in Methods section) 
at Fagatele Bay, Rose Atoll, and the open coast Tutuila indicate that living coral cover is greater 
in FBNMS because of the size distributions of coral colonies, even though the population 
densities are greater at Tutuila and Rose. 
Caveat --- It may also be the case that we record lower population densities of coral colonies in 
Fagatele Bay because it is impractical to try to count individual colonies in larger stands of 
branching corals such as Acropora intermedia (Fig.16) so we recorded large continuous stands as 
a s a single colony, whereas smaller digitate colonies typical of outer Tutuila and Rose Atoll are 
easily recorded separately. Nevertheless, there is substantially more living coral cover in 
Fagatele, which needs to be explained. 
 
