 
23 
 
Observations by one of us on Guam and Maui and conversations with colleagues from around 
the tropical Pacific suggest that Porites rus is increasing in many sites in the tropical Pacific. 
The encrusting Montipora spp. (other than M. verrilli and M. grisea) and Pocillopora spp. did 
not change significantly over the four decades in Fagatele Bay. This is another kudo for FBNMS, 
because Pocillopora has significantly declined in areas other than Fagatele Bay. 
On the other hand, Pavona varians s.l. has been increasing significantly (p < 0.001 df 1,551) on 
most sites outside Fagalete Bay, but P.  varians s.l. has been almost nonexistent in Fagatele Bay 
since 1985. 
Since the total coral colony population density at FBNMS has remained the same across the four 
decades, then the significant increases in Acropora spp., Porites rus, and Montipora grisea 
suggests there must have been substantially decreased population densities of some other 
species. Although the larger colonies of massive Porites are persisting, the population density of 
mound-shaped Porites spp. have bee significantly decreasing both on the outer coast of Tutuila 
and in FBNMS. The endemic Porites randalli has showed the most drastic decrease since 1996 
(Fig. 14). Up until 1996, it was first or second (to M. grisea) most abundant and ubiquitous 
(McArdle 2003) of all coral species in American Samoa. Although it has practically disappeared 
from the forereef slope, it still seems to be doing fine in other habitats such as reef-flat pools. 
Paradox of Rose Atoll corals compared to corals in Fagatele Bay 
We have been confronted with the question as to why Acropora grow into the substantially larger 
size classes in Fagatele Bay, but not at Ta’u and Rose Atoll (Fig. 5). It has been suggested that 
wave energy may affect coral colonies that have a lot of branches or wave-resistant surface area 
attached to the substratum by a smaller stalk or trunk. Both Ta’u and Rose Atoll drop off steeply 
from shore and are frequently exposed directly to strong surf. The stronger trade winds come 
from the east-southeast (PIFSC-CRED data provided in Aeby et al. 2008). Brian Peck suggested 
that heavy wave action on the open coasts of Rose Atoll prevent branching genera such as 
Acropora from getting large. This same suggestion was previously given independently by Alice 
Lawrence for the Acropora colonies staying small at Ta’u. Tutuila has a broader, shallower shelf 
than do Ta’u and Rose and also has offshore banks such as Taema that help reduce the energy of 
oceanic waves. Fagatele Bay is an exception on Tutuila because the shelf drops steeply off 
Fagatele. However, Fagatele is relatively protected from waves from the southeast by Larsen Bay 
and Steps Point. Ironically, our February 2024 survey has hindered by strong swells from the 
west; but these were swells, not surf, which tossed the scientists around, but did not break 
corals.. 
It is possible that frequent strong waves limit the sizes of branching corals (Figs. 5, 17), but the 
massive or mound-shaped Porites tend to grow into the larger size classes (Fig. 13 and 18 this 
paper; Coward et al. 2020). It may be that massive coral colonies with a broad attachment at their 
bases and with rounded hemispherical morphologies are less vulnerable to waves than branching 
corals. Therefore, wave action may be a plausible explanation of Ta’u where Acropora are  
