 
5 
 
Since 1917, the surveys in American Samoa have usually focused on population densities and 
size distributions of coral colonies rather than surface cover in order to better assess what is 
happening. For example, we will show that at least 100 species have been doing well because of 
their abundant recruitment, but we have found only large colonies of three species of Goniopora, 
with no sign of recruitment of Goniopora spp. in our surveys for four decades. This report will 
emphasize the dynamics of the coral communities with population densities and size 
distributions. 
From 1917 through 1973, surveys were done counting coral colonies in quadrats along the 
transects. From 1982 to 1988, we used the point-quarter method, which was precise and super-
informative, but very slow. In 1995, Craig Mundy brought from Australia the method of rapidly 
sorting coral diameters into seven size classes that has been used since. (Birkeland and Fenner 
find it faster to measure diameters and sort them into size classes in the evening after dives. This 
is because Birkeland, at least, finds it too hard and too prone to error to try to remember which 
class is which when rapidly measuring. Nevertheless, it is still much faster than the point-quarter 
method.) 
The reason binning into size classes is better than precise measures is because the extreme range 
of sizes of coral colonies demands as many data as possible. We record colonies from 2 cm to 
22.4 m (Coward et al. 2020), a 1120-fold range of diameters with everything in between. With 
each colony bringing such extreme variance, we need many data, maintaining accuracy, but 
compromising precision. When diameters are translated into surface areas, the 2-cm disk is 3.14 
cm2 while the massive hemisphere is 7,881,627.65 cm2, a 2,510,072.5-fold difference in living 
area. Surveys of most animals do not need to handle such a range of sizes. 
Sorting into seven size categories is a good procedure because it allows us to collect coral survey 
data more rapidly. We found that the coral colonies in Fagatele Bay grew into larger size 
categories more frequently than at Rose Atoll or on the outer coast of Tutuila.  This is much more 
substantial than is indicated by the size-class categories. The size-class categories double at each 
step, but that greatly underrepresents what this means in size (surface area), because surface area 
involves the radius squared.  Each stage increases by the square of a doubled number.  The 
surface area increases with the size category from (in cm2):  4.9   44.2    177    707   2,827    
11,310   (180,956).  
Our calculations involve a gross assumption that all colonies are circular, but this is a reasonable 
method to illustrate the pattern, because the random variations resulting from shape probably 
have smaller effects than the large scale of fixed variation resulting from the squared increase of 
doubled radius. It also involves a gross assumption that the median diameter is a reasonable 
representative of the category size. The colony surface area in Category 7 is in parenthesis 
because it was calculated like the earlier categories, but it actually has no upper boundaries. 
Therefore, I plan to empirically calculate the areas of actual colonies in category 7 individually 
from the raw data.  
Because the difference in coral colony population densities between Fagatele and Rose are 
insignificant, I assumed they are the same. In calculations to illustrate the influence of a few 
corals in the larger size classes towards total living coral cover, I multiplied the percent of the 
corals in each size class times the representative area of each size class.   
