 
22 
 
Samoan reefs have good recruitment (Appendix 2). Of all coral colony diameters we have 
measured (34,883), 23.60 % were < 5 cm. Good recruitment is a sign that the species is not 
seriously affected by Allee effects. It also is a sign that the species population is not seriously 
stressed by temperature or other factors because when stressed, most corals divert energy from 
reproduction to survival (Birkeland 2015). When recovering from bleaching, some corals can go 
for four years before spawning (Levitan et al. 2014).  Corals in the same area that did not bleach 
can also go for four years before spawning because they also endured the stress even though they 
were able to avoid bleaching (Levitan et a. 2014).  Recruitment is a sign that at least some of the 
species population was in areas where it was not stressed. While species at the top of the 
recruitment list are shown to be doing well, this does not imply that those lower in the list are 
affected by Allee effects or are stressed. We only surveyed the forereef slopes. Those lower on 
the recruitment list may be doing well in other habitats.  
Trajectories over four decades 
Although the total coral colony population density of all species combined over all sites and all 
years has not changed when considering the entire four decades (Fig. 2), there have been major 
changes in species composition during this time. Although corals of individual species or genera 
have had their ups and downs, perhaps several times each, there are a number of these species 
that have had a significant increase or decrease over the entire four decades. This is what we are 
calling “trajectories”. According to the Merriam-Webster Dictionary, a “trajectory” is a straight 
line or path, or a line or path with a constant angle. The antonym of “trajectory” is “deviation”. 
Deviations in coral colony abundances over shorter time intervals within our four decades may 
be called “decreases” and “disturbances” or “increases” and “recoveries”. Trajectories are a 
rather abstract concept of an overall significant change (or significant lack of change) over 
decades. 
Coral-reef scientists who started their careers after the 1970s grew up familiar with climate 
change and long-term broad-scale changes in coral-reef systems and so they are familiar with 
trajectories, but those starting their careers in the 1970s and earlier perceived events and changes 
in coral-reef systems as cyclic, e.g., disturbance and recovery, El Niño – La Niña, seasons, etc. 
Those starting by the 1970s understand trajectories, but are uncomfortable with them, feeling the 
systems should be fluctuating about some “normal” state, rather than continuing long-term 
changes to a new state for decades, perhaps permanently in our scale of reference. 
The average population densities of coral colonies were about 12-13 per m2 from 1982 – 2018 on 
the outer coast of Tutuila and 11 per m2 from 1985 – 2024 in FBNMS.  Within this general 
population density over these four decades, there have been some trajectories, or overall changes 
over these four decades.  
Acropora spp. increased over these four decades in FBNMS, but decreased on the outer coasts of 
Tutuila and Aunu’u. This is probably the change that leads people to believe the coral 
communities in FBNMS from 2018 to 2024 have been in the best condition since 1979. Porites 
rus and Montipora grisea have increased on both the outer coast of Tutuila and FBNMS. 
