 
2 
 
significantly decreased, while Acropora spp., and Montipora grisea have substantially increased, 
some other species must have decreased. The endemic Porites randalli was once the most 
abundant species of coral in FBNMS, but now appears to be gone from FBNMS, the decline 
starting around 2002. Pocillopora and Porites species have been decreasing significantly on the 
outer coasts of Tutuila since 1982, but there has been no overall change in Pocillopora spp. 
population densities in Fagatele Bay since 1985 (p > 0.492). Montipora verrilli was one of the 
more predominant species of  Montipora through 1998, but it crashed to very few in 2002 and 
has not been recorded on our transects for the last 22 years. In contrast, Montipora grisea was 
not recorded at all on our transects before 1995. When it abruptly appeared in 1995, it was 
immediately the most abundant coral with 3379 M. grisea recorded, or 23% of the total number 
of colonies of about 160 other species and has been the most abundant species around Tutuila 
since that initial arrival. Strangely, Pavona varians s.l. and P. chiriquiensis (part of P. varians 
s.l.) together are generally second or third most abundant species around Tutuila, but are almost 
nonexistent in FBNMS. The most remarkable finding is that although the waters in FBNMS have 
a significantly lower carbonate ion availability (measured by aragonite saturation state) than the 
waters of Rose Atoll, and therefore the corals at Rose Atoll should be growing faster, the living 
coral cover and size distributions of coral communities are substantially greater in FBNMS. A 
hypothetical explanation is that the corals at Rose Atoll are growing as fast or faster than in 
FBNMS because of the availability of carbonate ions, but the crustose coralline algae Porolithon 
spp., in combination with consistent wave energy, may respond to high levels of carbonate ion 
availability more than the corals do and are thereby overgrowing the coral colonies before the 
corals can grow to large sizes. Porolithon spp. probably plays major roles in the good 
performance of coral reefs in American Samoa by serving as a good substratum for successful 
recruitment of coral larvae and binding loose or weak substrata for survival of the coral colony as 
it grows. Coral colonies of most species have been found to be increasing in the larger size 
classes and increasing in population density since Cyclone Val in 1991. 
Introduction 
The Fagatele Bay National Marine Sanctuary of American Samoa was established in 1986 by the 
NOAA National Marine Sanctuary System in cooperation with the Government of American 
Samoa’s Division of Marine and Wildlife Resources. Although at 0.25 square miles (0.65 km2), 
FBNMS is the smallest of all NOAA National Marine Sanctuaries, it nevertheless preserves a 
treasure of at least 158 species of reef-building corals (Green et al. 1999; D. Fenner unpublished 
data) which is well over twice the number found in the entire Atlantic Ocean. There are at least 
297 species of reef fishes in FBNMS (Green et al. 1999). 
A year in advance (1985) of the establishment of FBNMS (1986), a baseline survey was done of 
the corals, fishes, macroinvertebrates, and algae. Six permanent location transects perpendicular 
to shore, running from 3 m to 18 m (where possible), were set up at approximately even intervals 
to provide information representing the entire bay (Fig. 1). Perpendicular to the permanent 
location transects, survey transects along which the data were collected were set up at depths of 3 
m, 6 m, 9 m, and 12 m where possible (Fig. 1). The baseline survey in 1985 found the coral 
communities to be recovering from the especially massive Acanthaster planci outbreak of 1978-
