 
28 
 
What evidence shows FBNMS coral communities to have outstanding 
performance? 
In contrast to most of the reef-building coral communities around the world (Eddy 
et al. 2021), the coral colony population densities in FBNMS over the past four 
decades have remained at the same level, despite major mortalities of corals from 
crown-of-thorns outbreaks, major cyclones, and the stress brought about by 
bleaching events.  
The coral communities in FBNMS fully recovered from Cyclone Val within 11 – 
17 years. 
The Coralline Lethal Orange Disease (CLOD) has been seen on CCA nearly every 
dive in Fagatele Bay for over 20 years, but the CCA has kept it under control. This 
may change if seawater temperatures increase, but the CCA in Fagatele Bay are not 
succumbing yet. 
Acropora spp. significantly increased in population density and grew into larger 
size categories in FBNMS, but significantly decreased in population density and 
showed almost no growth into larger size categories on the outer coat of Tutuila 
and Aunu’u. 
Literature Cited 
Aeby G,  Aletto SC, Anderson P, Carroll B, DiDonato E, DiDonato G, Farmer V, Fenner D, 
Jameson G, Gulick S, Houk P,  Lundblad E, Nadon M, Riolo F, Sabater M, Schroeder R, Smith 
E, Speicher M, Tuiteli C, Tagarino A, Vaitautolu S, Vaoli E, Vargas-Angel B, Vroom P 2008 the 
state of coral reef ecosystems of American Samoa. In Waddell JE, Clarke AM (eds) The state of 
coral reef ecosystems of the United States and Pacific Freely Associated States. NOAA Technical 
Memorandum NOS NCCOS 73. NOAA/NCCOS Center for Coastal Monitoring and 
Assessment’s Biogeography Team. Silver Spring, MD 
Birkeland C 2015 Biology trumps management: feedbacks and constraints of life-history traits. 
Pages 231 - 263 In Birkeland C (ed) Coral Reefs in the Anthropocene. Springer, Dordrecht 
Birkeland C, Green A, Lawrence A, Coward G, Vaeoso M, Fenner D 2021 Different resiliencies 
over ecological and geological time scales in American Samoa. Mar Ecol Progr Ser 673: 55 - 68 
Bruggemann JH, van Kessel AM, van Rooj JM, Breeman AM 1996 Bioerosion and sediment 
ingestion by the Caribbean parrotfish Scarus vetula and Sparisoma viride: implications of fish 
size, feeding mode, and habitat use. Mar Ecol Progr Ser 134: 59-71 
Coward G, Lawrence A, Ripley N, Brown V, Sudek M, Brown E, Moffitt I, Fuiawa B, Vargas-
Angel B 2020 A new record for a massive Porites colony at Ta’u American Samoa. Scientific 
Reports 
