32 
prevalence for hard corals. This pattern was primarily driven by the taxa Leptastrea, Montastrea, 
and Pocillopora.  
One advantage of using in situ temperature loggers for this study is the capacity to collect 
information on finely-scaled temporal patterns. For example, temperatures at the shallow reefs in 
Tutuila were driven by diurnal periods, while reefs at depth experienced variable temperatures 
due to internal waves. The statistical results, however, revealed that internal waves did not 
significantly explain any differences observed in bleaching prevalence. Specifically, in Tutuila, 
temperature variability was driven by daily cycles in the shallow reefs, and internal waves 
influenced the temperature variability for deeper reefs. Reefs in the shallow, middle, and deep 
reefs were all influenced by tides. Despite differences observed in the influence of diurnal cycles 
and internal waves on temperature variability, these two parameters were not significant at 
predicting bleaching prevalence for hard corals when all genera were combined. Galaxea was an 
exception and bleaching prevalence was significantly impacted by tidal and daily temperature 
fluctuations. Bleaching prevalence in Porites was also impacted by tidal influences on 
temperature variability. Temperature variability due to internal waves had no impact on 
bleaching prevalence in any coral genera. This observation is contrary to some studies that 
suggest internal waves will help mitigate heat stress by pulsating cool temperatures onto deeper 
reefs exposed to internal waves(Wall et al. 2015; Wyatt et al. 2020).We suggest that some of the 
observations linking heating metrics to bleaching prevalence in this study might portray a 
different assumption if bleaching data from the peak event were used here. This result may 
suggest that internal waves are not important at the beginning of a heat wave, but the next step 
would be to determine if internal waves become more important to Tutuila reefs after long-term 
heat stress exposure.  
Deeper reefs (~20–25 m), in general, have been hypothesized to be a refugia for corals from heat 
stress. One of the conditions of the deep reef refugia hypothesis is that they must be at or below 
the first thermocline during the annual thermal maximum (Riegl and Piller 2003). The deep reefs 
in Tutuila were not below the thermocline and experienced high temperature values and ranges 
in temperature. However, the deep reefs in Tutuila did experience slightly less bleaching 
prevalence than the shallow reefs. Thus, depth did mitigate bleaching to some capacity, but was 
not a complete refugia because severe heat stress was still recorded on deep reefs.  
Although not quantified, multiple observations recorded mass bleaching events in 2015 and 
2017(Coward et al. 2020); thus, the temporal analysis linking heating metrics calculated through 
time to observed bleaching events revealed that many heat stressors simultaneously are 
associated with accurately predicting bleaching events. However, the spatial analysis using 2015 
ecological survey data did not reveal compelling evidence that multiple heat stressors caused 
bleaching for all the hard corals combined, potentially due the timing of the surveys during the 
early stages of heat stress. Given the low bleaching prevalence, statistical analyses linking 
heating metrics to bleaching prevalence are limited under this framework and should be repeated 
with bleaching prevalence data collected during the peak bleaching event. Only then can the full 
extent to which all the heating metrics impacted coral communities and specific coral genera be 
understood. Nonetheless, a few coral genera, Leptastrea and Montastrea, seemed to have 
bleached more than the rest of the hard corals and were sensitive to cumulative heat stress (DHW 
corrected at depth), acute heat stress (short term spikes in the temperature that would last for a 
few days), and temperature variability (mean daily temperature range). Galaxea and Pocillopora 
