4 
 
Figure 1. Map of Tutuila, American Samoa. Black points represent the location of the temperature 
loggers. Sectors included are the Northwest (NW), North (N), Northeast (NE), Southwest (SW), 
Southeast (SE), and Southeast Island (SE Island).  At each point, a temperature logger was 
deployed at depths of 5 m, 15 m, and 25 m. 
Determining trend through time series analysis 
Hourly seawater temperature records were analyzed using a detrended fluctuation analysis 
(DFA) to reveal long-range correlations in temperature time series. Most time series statistical 
analyses require the data to be stationary; however, DFA allows for the detection of intrinsic 
self-similarity embedded in nonstationary time series (Király and Jánosi 2005). Stationary time 
series require that (a) the mean value of the time-series stays constant through time, i.e., the trend 
component is nullified, (b) the variance does not increase over time, and (c) seasonal effect is 
minimal. With global warming causing an increasing temperature trend and the temperature time 
series being seasonally dependent, the first and third constraints are automatically violated. 
Whether or not a time series data set is stationary or non-stationary can be statistically tested 
with an Augmented Dickey-Fuller (ADF) test in which results of p < 0.05 indicate a stationary 
time series data set, while p-values > 0.05 indicate a non-stationary time series data set. An ADF 
was applied to all temperature time series at 6 sites across the three depths and results indicated 
that all temperature time series were nonstationary (p-value > 0.05 for all sites and depths). 
Consequently, applying a statistical method designed for nonstationary time series data is 
relevant for this study and is within the scope of the DFA. 
Before the DFAs were applied to each temperature time series, they were tested to determine if 
they were additive or multiplicative time series. An additive time series adds the trend, 
seasonality, and residual add together to make the time series, whereas a multiplicative time 
series multiplies the three components to make the time series. Distinguishing between an 
