29 
Discussion 
Concurrent heat stress metrics led to bleaching events  
A ‘perfect storm’ of increased warming trend, increased heating rates, and the impact of 
cumulative and acute heat stress events caused the massive bleaching events of 2015 and 2017 in 
Tutuila. This conclusion comes from time series analyses linking heating metrics to observed, 
though not quantified, bleaching events that occurred during those years. A conglomerate of 
heating stressors cumulatively led to mass bleaching events, one metric independently did not 
predict mass bleaching (Table 8). This suggests that only using one heating metric will 
inaccurately predict bleaching events. For example, if cumulative heat stress (i.e., DHW) was the 
only metric used to predict mass bleaching, then the reefs in American Samoa should have had 
another massive bleaching event in 2016.  
Table 8. Presence/absence of each heat stressor for each year. Green represents a presence, and 
grey an absence, of each heat stress for each year. Asterisks (*) mark the years that incurred a 
massive bleaching event. Bold outline around bleaching year indicates that multiple heat stressors 
collectively led to the mass bleaching events. A green box in the cumulative heat stress row indicates 
the presence of a long-term heat stress event (measured as DHW). A green box in the acute heat 
stress row indicates the presence of a short-term heat stress event (last on a few hours and 
measured as DHH). 
Stressor 
2013 
2014 
2015* 
2016 
2017* 
2018 
Increased warming trend 
  
  
  
  
  
  
Cumulative heat stress 
  
  
  
  
  
  
Acute heat stress 
  
  
  
  
  
  
Increased heating rate 
  
  
  
  
  
  
Decreased daily temperature range 
  
  
  
  
  
  
Temporal patterns were the main drivers in patterns for heat stress 
Heat stress varied greatly over time, primarily from year to year, for warming trend, heat rates, 
acute stress, and cumulative stress. For temperature variability metrics, temperature ranges were 
greater during warming months compared to the cooling months, but in general there was no 
distinct pattern in temperature variability that changed from year to year. Overall, the patterns in 
temperature time series were similar across reefs and sites (Figure 3 and Figure 4); thus, if a hot 
anomaly occurred in a given year, then generally the entire island and all depths experienced that 
hot anomaly, though to slightly varying degrees of severity. 
Temporal patterns were the main drivers in patterns for heat stress; however, small spatial 
differences were observed for some metrics between depth and site. For example, during the 
beaching event of 2015, all sites and all depths experienced an increased warming trend, 
cumulative heat stress, acute heat stress, and increased heating rates. The degree to which each 
site and depth experienced each heat stressor varied slightly, though shallow reefs generally 
experienced warmer waters for longer periods of time. Fagatele, in the Southwest sector of 
Tutuila, experienced slightly warmer conditions compared to other sites around the island. 
Spatial variations were more prominent in the metrics for temperature variability, with depth 
being the largest gradient. 
