30 
Warming trends are expected to increase globally due to climate change, with uneven ocean 
warming affecting regional changes in global climate sensitivity (Xie 2020). The southern 
hemisphere has absorbed 90% of the net ocean heat gain in recent years compared to the 
northern hemisphere (Rathore et al. 2020), making corals in the southern hemisphere, like those 
at Tutuila in American Samoa, more vulnerable to future conditions. Not only are waters 
warming faster, but the intensity of the heatwave is increasing with new all-time high 
temperature records observed regularly(Cheng et al. 2021). Ocean warming is exacerbated by 
increasingly stronger and more frequent el Nino events (Claar et al. 2018), which compounds 
stress on corals. Ocean warming has resulted in the longest global coral bleaching event lasting 
from 2014–2017 (Eakin et al. 2019). Global reefs are currently experiencing annual trends that 
exceed summertime trends at most locations, and winter periods are shortening allowing less 
time for corals to recover from high temperatures(Heron et al. 2016; Lough et al. 2018).  
Reefs in Tutuila, American Samoa, were experiencing an increased warming trend for the years 
when massive bleaching events occurred. Detrended fluctuation analysis of the temperature time 
series revealed that the warming trend was not linear, but instead had a few peaks. For example, 
the temperature increased compared to the previous year in 2013, 2015, and 2017. The trend in 
the water temperature for 2014 remained similar to the previous year and did not increase. 
Meanwhile, in 2016, the trend decreased between the two peaks of 2015 and 2017. Thus, 
warming trend alone did not predict mass bleaching events or bleaching would have occurred in 
2013.  
Even though the trend did not increase in 2016, the heating rate did increase from the prior year. 
In fact, the heating rates progressively increased from year to year. Thus, the combined effects of 
increased warming trend and heating rates exacerbated any other heat stress on the reefs and 
amplified any acute or cumulative stress that the corals were experiencing in Tutuila. 
Not only is the temperature trend expected to increase under future climate change conditions, 
but cumulative and acute heat stress events are expected to increase in frequency, intensity, and 
duration (Skirving et al. 2019). Reefs in Tutuila experienced both short-term (lasting for a few 
hours) and long-term (lasting for multiple weeks) heat stress events in 2015 and 2017, which 
were associated with observed massive bleaching events. Temperature data from the 2015 
bleaching event indicated that cumulative and acute stress were present at all sites and depths, 
but the degree of heat stress slightly varied between site and depth, with shallow reefs having 
longer and more frequent periods of heat stress. Fagatele, in the southwest of Tutuila, 
experienced more cumulative and acute heat stress compared to the other sites (i.e., shallow reefs 
in Fagatele experienced two acute heat stress events instead of one like the deeper reefs there). 
All other sites and depths only experienced one acute and one cumulative heat stress event. 
Oceanographic differences and low residence times in the shallow bay may explain why Fagatele 
was exposed to more heat stress than the other sites. 
Measuring multiple heating metrics during peak bleaching is key to accurately linking heat 
stress to coral bleaching 
Cumulative heat stress is often measured through the metric degree heating week (DHW), which 
can have different definitions based on the time over which cumulative heat stress is calculated 
and whether or not hot anomalies are included in the calculation for the bleaching threshold. 
Currently, the most widely used definition of DHW is based on the NOAA Coral Reef Watch 
