19 
occurring every 12 hours and influencing the water temperature at all reefs and at all depths but 
becoming increasingly important with depth. Furthermore, in the shallow reefs, the diurnal cycle 
had a stronger influence on temperature variation than semidiurnal tides. However, for some mid 
water reefs, the diurnal daylight cycles and semidiurnal tides had almost a similar influence on 
the temperature variation, i.e., 24 hr and 12 hr frequency peaks were nearly the same height, at 
least for reefs at the North, Northeast, and Southeast Island sites during the warming season. 
Interestingly, the deep reefs at all sites except the North site were also influenced by internal 
waves occurring at a frequency of every 48 hours, which was not observed at shallow or middle 
reefs. Furthermore, these internal waves only appear during the warming season and are not 
detectable during the cooling months. In general, the PSD analysis confirmed the cross-
correlation analysis showing similar large-scale temporal patterns, and yet the PSD analysis also 
provided additional information on fine-scale temporal patterns, revealing that they differ 
slightly by depth. 
Daily temperature ranges were significantly different (p(df,F) = values) between depth (p(2,11) = 
0.003), year (p(5,12) < 0.001), periods of heating versus cooling (p(1,7) )<0.001), and site (p(5,10) < 
0.001). Temperature ranges were more variable during the heating part of year compared to the 
cooling periods (Figure 7a). The greatest temperature ranges were observed in the austral 
summer months of January, February, and March. Unexpectedly, however, the deeper reefs 
experienced the greatest temperature ranges (Figure 7b), not the shallow reefs. There were also 
significant differences between sites; the reefs at Southwest Fagatele had higher daily 
temperature ranges than the other sites, but there was no apparent spatial pattern. Furthermore, 
daily temperature ranges were also statistically different between years, but there was no 
relationship between daily temperature ranges and the massive bleaching events; the 2014–2015 
year had high variability in daily temperature, but the 2016–2017 year did not. 
