6 
The trapezoid integration for DHW at depth was calculated using the ‘AUC’ function in the R 
package ‘DescTools.’ DHW at depth values were calculated each year the temperature climbed 
above the bleaching threshold. Additionally, the DHW at depth was also calculated only for the 
30 days prior to the ecological surveys. For this study, only DHWdepth-biased was calculated 
(henceforth just called DHW), not the DHW traditionally calculated via satellite data. 
Acute heating 
Acute heating stress, for this study, is defined as any short-term spike in the temperature time 
series away from the normal seasonal cycle that occurred in the austral summer months. 
Specifically, any time the temperature rose above the bleaching threshold (MMM +1) for an 
intense, but relatively short period (lasting a few hours to a few days), it was considered to be an 
acute stress event. Acute heat stress was initially treated as binary to indicate the presence or 
absence of an acute thermal stress event per annum. Acute heat stress was also quantified by the 
number of events per year and also by the duration of the acute stress event (hours above the 
bleaching threshold during this short-term temperature spike).  
Heating rates 
The heating rate (°C hr-1) for each warming period was calculated for each year for all sites and 
depths. The warming period is the period in which the temperature increased throughout the 
year, meanwhile the cooling period was the time in which temperature decreased. The exact 
dates in which the cooling period ended and the warming period started varied slightly from year 
to year, but generally the warming period occurred from September to March, and the cooling 
period occurred between April and August.  
Measures of temperature variability 
Temperature time series show complex periodic behavior, and one technique that can be applied 
to identify underlying periodicities is called a power spectral density (PSD) analysis. Essentially, 
the covariance of the time series can be represented by a function known as the spectral density. 
PSD analyses were applied to the time series temperature data to observe any possible 
underlying periodicities. The temperature data were first transformed to the frequency domain 
via the non-parametric Daniell-Kernal method, which calculates the smooth spectral density by 
using centered moving averages(Shumway and Stoffer 2017). The spectral density represents the 
covariance of the time series. Periodograms are used to present the squared correlation between 
temperature time series data and sine and cosine waves (Venables and Ripley 2002). 
Periodograms were calculated using a fast Fourier transform for all temperature time series from 
all sites and depth strata(Bloomfield 2013). The frequency axis for the periodograms were 
converted to cycles per unit time by extracting the frequency data from the PSD and dividing by 
the length of the sample interval. The spectral density was then multiplied by 2 so that the area 
under the curve of the periodogram equals the variance of the time series. Periodograms were 
applied to the entire time series of a site (all data that were collected between 2012 and 2018), 
and PSD was calculated for the warming and cooling cycles for each time series. Furthermore, a 
few additional metrics were calculated from the PSD output just for the 2014–2015 time period. 
Specifically, the peaks for the power spectral density plots for variability in the temperature time 
series due to tides (12 hr), daily (24 hr), and interval waves (48 hr) were quantified and 
compared between sites and depths. 
