11 
Results 
Time series analysis 
Trends and detrended seasonality 
Temperature time series were detrended to decompose the trend from the data and also observe 
seasonality periodicities. In the case that less than two years of data were available, then the 
trend could not be determined. However, daily and weekly periodicities could still be evaluated. 
Daily, weekly, and yearly time factors were the strongest variables controlling the temperature 
time series (Figure 2).  
The time series analysis revealed a few key patterns. Firstly, overall patterns in each temperature 
logger were similar between site and depth, with acute heat stress (spikes in temperature above 
the bleaching threshold, MMM+1°C, lasting for a few hours to a few days with high peaks) 
occurring in austral summers of 2015, 2016, and 2017 for most sites at all depths (Figure 2c). 
The acute heat stress also occurred in 2018 for the middle and deep reefs, but not for the shallow 
reefs. Secondly, all sites and depths showed an overall increasing temperature trend through 
time, with the exception of 2016 when the mean annual temperature decreased in between the 
two massive bleaching events, and in 2018 when temperature decrease following the second 
massive bleaching event (Figure 2b). Thirdly, daily temperature variability is only high while 
waters are warm; however, during cooling seasons the daily temperature has less range (Figure 
2c). The highest daily ranges only occur for a few days and coincide with the acute heat stress 
period. Fourthly, measurements from week to week indicate that the biggest variability in 
temperature occurred in the few weeks prior to the highest seasonal temperatures reached each 
year (Figure 2d). In other words, daily variability is greater during warming periods, but in the 
beginning of the warming season, the first few weeks have lower variability. However, at the end 
of the heating season, the week-to-week variability is highest right before the peak seasonal 
temperature is met. This is true for 2013–2016, but not for 2017 or 2018. And finally, when 
looking at the periodicity due to yearly cycles, every single annual pattern had a double high 
peak in which there was an initial heating rate increase, followed by a slight decrease, and then 
another increase in temperatures during the warming period (Figure 2e). 
