26 
Associations between heating metrics of 2015 and bleaching prevalence 
Only one metric for each heat stress type was used in the GAMLSS models to examine impacts 
of heat stress on bleaching prevalence. The GAMLSS results for heat stress impacts on coral 
bleaching prevalence are found in Table 6.  
Temperature variability (daily temperature range for the warming season of 2014–2015) was the 
only heat stress type that influenced the bleaching prevalence of all hard corals. All heating rates 
were high in 2014–2015, but heating rate did not vary between site and depth, and thus heating 
rate had no detectable impact on bleaching prevalence for corals when examining data just for 
one year. In other words, heating rates vary with time, but our bleaching data are spatial not 
temporal, and thus heating rates appeared to have no influence on the bleaching prevalence. 
Cumulative heat stress, acute heat stress, and temperature variability impacted the bleaching 
prevalence of a few coral genera. 
All reefs at all sites and depths were exposed to high heat stress in the austral summer of 2014–
2015. Thus, all reefs experienced cumulative heat stress, acute stress, increased warming trend, 
and high heating rates most of which varied by year (Figure 2, Figure 5, Figure 7), although there 
are some spatial differences observed even just for the austral summer of 2015. Most of the 
spatial differences in heat stress occurred through the variability parameters. Temperature 
variability was the only parameter to influence the bleaching prevalence of all the hard corals 
combined. Thus, we ran additional GAMLSS tests to examine the variability metrics on 
bleaching prevalence. 
The mean daily temperature range was the primary variability parameter linked to changes in 
bleaching prevalence of corals (Table 7). Despite many of the variability metrics differing 
between site and depth (Table 3), these metrics did not seem to best predict bleaching prevalence 
for most coral general (Table 7). 
