22 
Coefficient of variation (CV) values differed significantly between sites (p(5,12) < 0.001), depth 
(p(2,7)–0.002), and year (p(5,7) < 0.001), but not between warming and cooling seasons (p(1,0.009) = 
0.93). The interactive effect between sites, depth, and year was also significant (p(20,2) < 0.01). 
Due to the interaction effect, no consistent pattern was evident between sites and years. 
However, post-hoc Tukey tests reveal that deep reefs varied more from their long-term mean 
compared to the middle and shallow reefs (Figure 8). On average, deep reefs vary ± 72.3% from 
their long term mean temperature, whereas mid and shallow reefs vary ± 63.8% and ± 62.0%, 
respectively, from their long term temperature. 
 
Figure 8. Boxplots of coefficient of variation (CV) values for shallow (5 m), mid (15 m), and deep 
(25 m) reefs. Deep reef CV values are significantly different from middle and shallow reefs (*), but 
the CV of middle and shallow reefs are not significantly different from each other (n.s.). 
(b) Bleaching year (2015) 
Tides (measured by peak in PSD at 12 hr) had similar influences on reefs at all sites and depths 
(Table 3). Daily fluctuations (measured by peak in PSD at 24 hr) were greater at shallow depths 
compared to the mid and deep reefs, and Southwest site in Fagatele showed greater daily 
fluctuations compared to the other sites. Internal tides (measured by peak in PSD at 48 hr) 
occurred more at the deep reefs compared to the mid and shallow reefs. The Southwest site in 
Fagatele was exposed to more internal waves compared to the other sites. For the warming 
period prior to the mass bleaching event, daily temperature ranges varied between site and depth. 
Unexpectedly, the deeper reefs experienced greater daily temperature ranges than the shallow 
reefs. Also, Southeast Island Aunuu experienced high daily temperature ranges, while the 
Southeast experienced lower daily temperature ranges. Daily temperature means and ranges 30 
days prior to the ecological survey date varied between site and depth, as well as day, since the 
ecological surveys were conducted on different days over a month long period. 
