10 
physiologically react to both short-term heat stress and long-term heat stress; thus, both 
predictors were retained in the models. This was justified by comparing the AIC values among 
the three models: (1) bleaching prevalence ~ cumulative + acute + other metrics, (2) bleaching 
prevalence ~ cumulative + other metrics, and (3) bleaching prevalence ~ acute + other metrics), 
in which both parameters are kept or one or the other is removed. The AIC values were within 2 
units of each other and thus the models were not significantly different from each other. Due to 
their ecological relevance, both cumulative and acute heat stress metrics were kept in the models, 
despite being highly correlated. All the other heating metrics did not exhibit multi-collinearity. 
GAMLSS were initially applied to bleaching prevalence data to test for differences between 
depth, site, and the interactions between the two for all hard corals and the dominant coral 
genera. GAMLSS were also applied to determine whether bleaching prevalence varied according 
to heat stress metrics. Heating metrics were only applied to ecological sites that fell within a 3 
nautical mile radius of the temperature logger and at the same depth. Five types of heat stress 
were identified: cumulative heat stress, acute heat stress, warming trend, heating rates, and 
variability. Several heating metrics were calculated for each type of heat stress. For example, 
acute heat stress is one type of heat stress, measured by multiple metrics such as its presence or 
absence, the number of acute heat stress events, and we also quantified how long the acute heat 
stress events lasted. Initially, we chose one heating metric from each type of heat stress and used 
GAMLSS to determine if each heating stress type impacted the bleached prevalence of all hard 
corals combined, as well as the dominant coral genera. This particular analysis cumulative heat 
stress: DHW; acute heat stress: hours above the bleaching threshold; increasing trend, heating 
rate, variability: mean daily temperature range for the 2014–2015 warming season. Trend was 
removed in the GAMLSS analysis because all reefs and sites experienced a warming trend in 
2015 so there were no differences in trend. Bleaching prevalence was the response variable in the 
models. Furthermore, GAMLSS were also applied to bleaching prevalence data with only 
temperature variability metrics included in the model. Specifically, we tested to see if bleaching 
prevalence varied according to the diurnal, tidal, or internal wave period, as well as the daily 
temperature ranges for the entire warming period linked to the 2015 bleaching event, and also the 
temperature range for the 30 days prior to the ecological survey.  
