7 
Daily temperature ranges were calculated for the warming and cooling seasons of each year for 
the entire time series. In 2015, daily temperature ranges and daily mean temperatures were 
calculated for the 30 days prior to the ecological surveys. The intent was to determine if the daily 
temperature means and ranges may have been extra warm at the beginning of the bleaching event 
when bleaching prevalence in corals was being recorded.  
The coefficient of variation (CV) was calculated for all sites and depths each year. It is a measure 
of relative variability and is the ratio of standard deviation to the mean; a high CV value suggests 
more variation relative to its mean compared to a low CV value. CV is a useful calculation to 
determine the variance of the historical mean temperature and the current mean temperature, and 
thus a method to evaluate inter-annual variability in seawater temperatures.  
Ecological surveys 
As a regular part of NOAA’s National Coral Reef Monitoring Program (NCRMP), bleaching 
surveys were collected at sites using a stratified random sampling design. These surveys were 
conducted during February and March of 2015, which coincided with the beginning of the 
thermal stress event. American Samoan coral reefs were exposed to hot water anomalies from 
January to June of 2015; peak heat occurred from mid-March to late April. Thus, the full extent 
of coral bleaching was not captured in these ecological surveys, but they may provide a glimpse 
into how corals react to the early stages of heat stress. Only the NCRMP benthic survey sites that 
were within 3 nautical miles of the STR were used in this study. The total number of NCRMP 
benthic survey sites that fit within the 3 nautical miles of the STR are included in Table 1. 
Bleaching surveys were conducted using the Rapid Ecological Assessment methods (Winston et 
al. 2019). Random sites are selected across three depth categories (shallow, 0–6 m; mid > 6–18 
m and deep > 18–25 m) on the forereef. Surveys at each site were conducted within four 
segments (1 m × 2.5 m) along an 18-m belt transect. Adult coral colonies (≥ 5 cm) abundance by 
genus and bleaching extent and severity were recorded. The four segments were pooled together, 
and site-level bleaching prevalence was calculated by dividing the number of corals displaying 
any loss of pigmentation (paled to fully bleached) by the total number of colonies multiplied by 
100. Bleaching prevalence was calculated for all hard corals combined, along with the dominant 
coral genera. 
In addition to the recorded bleaching in 2015, jurisdictional partners in American Samoa also 
observed bleaching during the austral summers of 2015 and 2017. Unfortunately, the full extent 
of bleaching around the whole of Tutuila was not surveyed by any institute or agency, so 
quantitative information is not available. However, qualitative information from locals observing 
mass bleaching and occasionally photographing devastated reefs suggests that mass bleaching 
events occurred in both 2015 and 2017. 
 
