39 
Concluding Remarks 
A ‘perfect storm’ of heat stress events caused observed bleaching events of 2015 and 2017 
Massive bleaching events were observed in American Samoa during 2015 and 2017 (Coward et 
al. 2020). A conglomerate of heating stressors cumulatively led to bleaching events in 2015 and 
2017 at coral reefs in Tutuila, American Samoa. One metric independently did not predict mass 
bleaching. Instead, multiple stressors including cumulative and acute heat stress, a warming 
trend, and increased heating rates, collectively led to the mass bleaching events of 2015 and 
2017. Temperature variability between years was not the strongest predictor for bleaching. Only 
using one heating metric can inaccurately predict bleaching events. For example, if cumulative 
heat stress (i.e., DHW) was the only metric used to predict mass bleaching, then the reefs in 
American Samoa should have had another massive bleaching event in 2016. Fortunately, 2016 
did not have a massive bleaching event, likely due to the trend not increasing that year.  
Certain coral genera may be the beacon of bleaching events 
Since the ecological surveys were conducted at the very beginning of the bleaching event before 
it was widespread, the coral genera that had the most bleaching prevalence (Leptastrea and 
Monastrea) may be the genera that first react to heat stress, and therefore may be the warning 
that a mass bleaching event is imminent.  
The way forward 
This study has highlighted that most heating metrics vary through time and not necessarily 
though space and depth. This limits the scope of scientific questions unless you have co-located 
temporal and spatial data. For example, in the case of the 2015 bleaching event in American 
Samoa, even though there was some variation in heat stress spatially, most of the variation in 
heat stress occurred from year to year. Meaning that during a hot year where reefs experience a 
bleaching event, all the reefs are exposed to cumulative heat stress, acute heat stress, increasing 
trend, and increased heat rates. That makes it difficult to answer questions like, “how do corals 
react to cumulative heat stress?” if you only have ecological data from one point in time when 
everything is hot. To answer this question, you need ecological data from when it was not hot for 
comparison. The next step is to link time series temperature data with time series ecological data. 
