9 
2008). Checks for all GLMs indicated that no influential data points or outliers were present in 
the data and model assumptions were met. 
Heat stress metrics from bleaching year (2015)  
In addition to the GLMs applied to the heating metrics across the full time series (2012–2018), 
additional GLMs were applied to the heating metrics calculated during the 2015 bleaching events 
to test for spatial differences between sites. Specifically, GLMs with a Gaussian distribution and 
identity function were applied to acute stress and cumulative (DHW) heat stress, and the number 
of acute heat stress events experienced, between site and depth for the 2015 bleaching season 
only. Additionally, GLMs with a Gaussian distribution and identity function tested for 
differences in heating rates between sites and depth. GLMs with a gamma distribution and log 
link function were used to determine if daily temperature ranges were significantly different 
between sites and depths. Furthermore, the peaks from the periodograms produced by the 
spectral analysis that were associated with 24-hr (daily), 12-hr (tidal), and 48-hr (internal wave) 
cycling were quantified, and GLMs were applied to the quantified peaks to determine which of 
these parameters varied with depth and site. 
Heat stress metrics associated with bleaching from ecological surveys 
Ecological data (i.e., bleaching prevalence data) were only used from NRCMP survey sites 
within 3 nautical miles of the temperature logger at the same depth. A series of univariate 
distributional regression models was used to assess the association between bleaching prevalence 
and heating metrics. While exploring the ecological survey data, generalized additive models for 
location, scale, and shape (GAMLSS) were used to test for differences in bleaching prevalence 
for all hard coral genera combined and separately for the dominant coral genera.  
The primary advantage of applying GAMSLSS (as opposed to Generalized Linear Models 
(GLMs) or Generalized Additive Models (GAMs)) is that these univariate distributional 
regression models allow for flexibility in the distributions and have over 100 continuous, 
discrete, and mixed models for the response data. Bleaching prevalence data are notoriously 
skewed to data values of either 0 (0% bleaching prevalence) or 1 (100% bleaching prevalence). 
GAMLSS allow for data that are bounded by 0 and 1, but also have values in between. 
Additionally, GAMLSS allow for the distribution parameters (mu, sigma, tau, and nu), not just 
the mean values, to be modelled in terms of both fixed and random effects. The optimal 
GAMLSS were chosen following steps in Stasinopoulos et al. (2017) by testing for the best 
model family to fit the data (zero-inflated, one-inflated, inflated at zero and one), determining the 
significant variables, determining the best fit distribution parameters (mu, sigma, tau, and nu), 
and applying AIC (Stasinopoulos et al. 2017). 
While determining the best-fit model, the variance of inflation factor (VIF) was calculated 
between the heating metrics to determine the amount of multi-collinearity between multiple 
regression variables. Cumulative heating stress (DHW) and acute heat stress (short-term spike in 
temperature) were highly correlated (r2=93%, VIP > 10), but when either DHW or acute heat 
stress were removed from the VIF calculation with the rest of the heating metrics (trend, heating 
rates, etc.), there was no collinearity (low VIP value of 1.6). Despite the strong relationship 
between cumulative and acute heat stress, neither metric was removed from the optimal due to 
the ecological relevance that both metrics have on the physiology of a coral. Corals 
