2 
thermal stress during El Niño-Southern Oscillation phases, and global bleaching events 
coincided with cyclic El Niño events (Barkley et al. 2018; Claar et al. 2018) and rapid shifts 
from El Niño to La Niña (Dalton et al. 2020). In the last decade, however, global warming has 
exceeded even the cooler la Niña events from 30 years ago, and mass bleaching events are 
occurring at greater frequencies even outside of El Niño (Hughes et al. 2018a) resulting in less 
time for reefs to recover between events.  
In an effort to predict future bleaching events, various temperature predictor variables have been 
calculated primarily from sea surface temperatures (SST) derived from satellite data. The most 
extensively used thermal stress metric is degree heating weeks (DHW), which calculates 
accumulated heat stress in an area by adding temperature values exceeding the bleaching 
threshold (maximum monthly mean temperature + 1 °C) over a three month period(Liu et al. 
2003, 2014). Satellite-derived products like DHW have proven reliable as a mass bleaching 
index and have the advantage that the data are publicly available through the U.S. National 
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration’s (NOAA) Coral Reef Watch Program. However, 
limitations of satellite-derived products include calculations extended over large spatial areas 
(typically 5 km or 50 km). Satellite-derived SST also ignores daily temperature variability as 
well as temperature variability that may occur between reefs in an area that large. Furthermore, 
surface temperatures are generally a few degrees different than the water temperature at depth 
where corals actually exist. Recently, a depth-biased method to calculate DHW was developed to 
account for the temperature differences between corals at depths versus satellite-derived at sea 
surface, but this method requires in situ temperature at reef depth (Venegas et al. 2019). In situ 
temperature logger deployment and maintenance are generally cost prohibitive and loggers cover 
less area compared to satellite data its major advantages are (a) depth specific temperature data 
co-located at a given reef, and (b) high sampling frequencies (e.g., data could be collected every 
5 minutes). High frequency temperature data can provide informative measures to predict 
bleaching prevalence that may be overlooked if only satellite-derived metrics are evaluated. For 
example, additional heating metrics like acute heat stress (high heat stress on the order of hours 
or days), heating rates, and temperature variability over different time scales (e.g., diurnal, tidal, 
seasonal) can be calculated from in situ temperature logger data and used as bleaching metrics 
(Safaie et al. 2018).  
To better understand vertical thermal structure of reefs at depth and identify predictors of mass 
bleaching events using high frequency time series data, we used long-term (2012–2018) in situ 
temperature data collected at multiple reefs and depths around the island of Tutuila in American 
Samoa. Located in the central South Pacific, Tutuila is 1 of 5 volcanic islands and 2 atolls that 
comprise American Samoa. Lying just a few kilometers from shore, Tutuila contains shallow 
fringing reefs and a deep offshore bank (Birkeland et al. 2008). American Samoa experienced 
severe bleaching in 1994, 2003, 2015 and 2017 (Coward et al. 2020). The objectives of our study 
are to (1) conduct a time series analysis on in situ temperature data (2012–2018) and calculate 
heating metrics and (2) determine whether heating metrics predicted coral bleaching prevalence 
during the 2015 bleaching event. 
