31 
(CRW) calculation that uses satellite sensor data to monitor global sea surface temperatures. In 
this satellite-derived definition, DHW is calculated over a 12-week period and is the sum of the 
temperature anomalies exceeding the bleaching threshold, i.e., the maximum monthly plus 1 °C 
(MMM + 1°C) for either 5 km or 50 km gridded regions (Liu et al. 2014). DHW is a highly 
effective metric used for predicting mass coral bleaching and has been validated for historical 
mass bleaching events (Kayanne 2017). This study calculated DHW corrected at depth, as 
opposed to DHW calculated at the sea surface just using satellite data and has identified a few 
issues with any definition of DHW. For example, using only one heating metric can lead to an 
erroneous prediction for bleaching, e.g., reefs in Tutuila experienced cumulative heat stress in 
2016, but did not bleach.  
The bleaching threshold is usually defined as MMM + 1 °C, but this term gets applied in a 
general sense to all corals globally. However, bleaching susceptibility in corals is highly 
variable. When observed in the field, it can appear as patchy even within a single coral colony 
experiencing different levels of bleaching. Bleaching thresholds for corals measured in situ 
varies by site, between coral taxa, and also by the age of the coral(Edmunds 2004; Shuail et al. 
2016). In the case of Tutuila reefs, depth-corrected DHW varied slightly between depth (shallow 
reefs experiencing greater DHW values) and site (Fagatele in the southwest of Tutuila 
experienced higher DHW values compared to the other sites), but DHW did not impact the 
overall bleaching prevalence of all hard corals. DHW, however, did impact the bleaching 
prevalence of just a few select taxa (Leptastrea, Montastrea, Galaxea, Pocillopora). The 
bleaching threshold of these taxa may be lower compared to other coral species in the 
community, highlighting the need to further examine the underlying mechanisms that drive such 
patchiness in bleaching during heat waves. 
Bleaching thresholds may also shift through time. Corals may shift their thermal tolerance due to 
adaptation or through natural selection of heat-tolerant symbionts(Rowan 2004; Berkelmans and 
Van Oppen 2006). Additionally, successive heatwave exposure may also change the coral 
community response through selective mortality(Fox et al. 2021). The ability of the past to 
influence the present trajectory of an ecosystem has been termed ‘ecological memory’, and 
evidence from the successive bleaching events in 2016 and 2017 on the Great Barrier Reef 
suggests that the extent of bleaching during the second heat wave was contingent on the 
physiological and ecological responses of the corals from the previous year’s heatwave (Hughes 
et al. 2019). Understanding how bleaching thresholds may or may not shift through time and 
how coral communities respond will be imperative to best predict future bleaching events. 
Historical temperature exposure impacts coral tolerance through yet another mechanism. Not 
only does repetitive exposure to acute and cumulative heat stress alter bleaching thresholds and 
heat tolerance for some coral species, but exposure to large ranges in temperature variability can 
mean that some corals are subject to less bleaching(Carilli et al. 2012). Daily or tidal fluctuations 
in temperature can sufficiently increase the tolerance of some corals and reduce their likelihood 
to bleach (Safaie et al. 2018). Safaie et al. (2018) observed that high temperature variability 30 
days prior to a bleaching event was the main metric out of 20 variables with the highest 
predictive power to best explain when bleaching events may occur (Safaie et al. 2018). This was 
not observed for reefs in Tutuila, however. Temperature variability 30 days prior to the 
ecological survey was not correlated with bleaching prevalence on hard corals. Nonetheless, the 
temperature range throughout the entire warming period was a main predictor for bleaching 
