5 
additive and multiplicative time series is completed by first plotting the detrended time series of 
the additive model. If the noise from the additive model were to steadily increase, then the best 
fit model would be multiplicative. However, in the case of our time series data, the noise variable 
after detrending does not steadily increase making additive time series model was the best fit for 
our time series data. DFAs were then applied to all additive time series models, and temperature 
time series were decomposed for trends, seasonality (daily, weekly, annual), and remainder (i.e., 
error).  
Temperature time series are highly autocorrelated, thus, we avoid linear regression modelling 
and utilize other time series statistical analysis instead (e.g., DFA analysis). Temperature time 
series were cross-correlated to look at the relationship between two different time series. Cross-
correlations were calculated between sites for each depth, and similarly between depths for each 
site. The results are presented using a correlation matrix with a scatterplot of two time series 
plotted against each other, fitted with a Lowess regression, and shown with the correlation value. 
Heat stress metrics 
Cumulative thermal stress 
Cumulative heat stress was determined by first calculating the maximum monthly mean (MMM) 
which was then used to calculate degree heating week (DHW). DHW is the integral of time spent 
above the bleaching threshold of MMM+1 °C. If MMM is calculated from a short time series 
that includes temperatures from a bleaching event, then the MMM will be skewed high. 
Therefore, to determine a more accurate MMM that has not been influenced by rare bleaching 
events, we used a longer climatological data set acquired from satellite. To then account for 
temperature differences between satellite data and reefs at depth, we applied the methods 
developed by Venegas et al. (2019) to all in situ temperature time series data(Venegas et al. 
2019). Historical sea surface temperatures (SST) from satellite data were downloaded through 
the NOAA’s Coral Reef Watch (CRW) for years 1985–2020 (the longest available time series). 
Specifically, the ‘CRW Daily Global 5 km Satellite Coral Bleaching Heat Stress Monitoring’ 
(version 3.1) data sets were downloaded through ERRDAP using the closest 5 km grid (i.e., 
nearest neighbor) to each in situ subsurface temperature recorder (STR) location. The daily mean 
SST were used to calculate the maximum monthly mean temperature from the satellite data 
(MMMsatellite). Next, the MMM was calculated from the in situ temperature data for each site and 
depth (MMMin situ). Then, the mean offset for in situ temperature data to account for warming 
temperatures and depth was calculated. This was completed by determining the MMMsatellite from 
the years 2012–2018, then determining the MMMin situ for each year, calculating the difference in 
MMM between the satellite data and STR, and averaging them.  
Offset = mean((MMMsatellite 2012 - MMMin situ 2012) + (MMMsatellite 2013 - MMMin situ 2013) , … , (MMMsatellite 2018 - MMMin situ 2018) ÷ 8) 
The offset was then applied to each in situ temperature time series: 
MMMin situ corrected = MMMsatellite - offset 
And finally, a depth-biased DHW was calculated for each STR site at all depths: 
DHWdepth-biased = ʃ (MMMin situ corrected +1 °C) dt 
