1 
Introduction 
Coral reefs are the most diverse ecosystems on the planet despite evolving in nutrient depleted 
water and within a narrow range in temperature, salinity, and water quality. Corals are 
predominantly limited to tropical, shallow waters in the euphotic zone due to their light-
dependent symbiotic relationship with photosynthetic algae called zooxanthellae. Primarily of 
the dinoflagellate genus Symbodinium, zooxanthellae translocate fixed carbon needed for 
productivity, respiration, and growth (Schmitz and Kremer 1977; Muscatine et al. 1989; Lesser 
2013). Environmental changes catalyze the breakdown of coral-symbionts by triggering corals to 
expel their zooxanthellae, causing coral tissue to pale and, in extreme cases, reveal their 
underlying skeleton and appear white. This phenomenon is called coral bleaching. Coral 
bleaching and the expulsion of zooxanthellae may have evolved as an adaptive mechanism to 
rapid environmental or physiological changes (Buddemeier and Fautin 1993; Stat et al. 2006). 
However, repercussions of mass coral bleaching are generally detrimental and include nutritional 
deprivation (Porter et al. 1989), reduced growth (Cantin et al. 2010), impaired reproduction 
(Szmant and Gassman 1990), coral mortality (Lesser and Farrell 2004), reef degradation (Eakin 
et al. 2019), shifts in coral assemblages (Hughes et al. 2018b), and habitat regime shifts from a 
hard coral framework to a macroalgae dominated reef (Ostrander et al. 2000). Coral recovery 
capacity is variable spatially and is in part dependent on species-specific responses and the 
severity of bleaching experienced(Baker et al. 2008), but is also determined by the underlying 
drivers that initially caused the bleaching event. 
Environmental stressors, site-level factors, depth, and thermal variability strongly influence 
bleaching onset and severity. Mass coral bleaching is primarily linked to elevated seawater 
temperatures but is also associated with increased solar irradiance (both PAR and UV portions of 
the spectrum)(Lesser and Farrell 2004) and oxidative stress (Lesser 1997; Downs et al. 2002). 
Furthermore, enriched nutrients (Wooldridge 2009) and ocean acidification(Anthony et al. 2008) 
can also influence the degree to which corals bleach during heat stress events. Bleaching severity 
also depends on coral taxa susceptibly to thermal stress, with faster growing and branching taxa 
(e.g., Acropora and Pocillopora) more likely to experience rapid bleaching and high mortality 
than slower growing, mounding taxa (e.g., Porites) (Baird and Marshall 2002). Variability in 
bleaching level and coral taxa susceptibility to bleaching highlight the need for more nuanced 
research linking multiple drivers to response variables. 
Mass bleaching events have been occurring at unprecedented rates in recent decades and are 
associated with anthropogenic global warming and elevated temperature stages of the El Niño-
Southern Oscillation (ENSO) (Glynn 2000; Hughes et al. 2017). Global warming has caused the 
trajectory of water temperatures to gradually and continuously increase at a rate of 0.005 °C yr-1 
in the upper ocean with mean temperatures 1–2 °C warmer compared to 50 years ago 
(Roemmich et al. 2015; Hughes et al. 2018a). Asymmetric differences between hemispheres 
indicate that net heat gain has been confined to the southern hemisphere during the last two 
decades, making coral reefs in the southern hemisphere especially vulnerable to anthropogenic 
warming (Rathore et al. 2020). Inter-decadal variability in seawater temperature and carbon 
storage capacity are associated with ENSO and are correlated with atmospheric patterns in the 
tropical Pacific, with decreased sea surface temperatures associated with la Niña and increased 
temperatures associated with El Niño (Winguth et al. 1994; Enfield and Mayer 1997). Prior to 
the 1980s, mass bleaching events were rare. After the 1980s, global warming increased the 
