CLIMATE CHANGE IN AMERICAN SA- MOA  Indicators and Considerations for Key Sectors
24
P I R C A  2 0 2 1
What Do Extreme Weather and Climate 
Change Mean for American Sa-moa’s Families, 
Households, and Vulnerable Populations?
Managing Climate Risks in the Face of 
Uncertainty 
Climate change impacts are often difficult to 
predict, leading to uncertainties in the timing, 
magnitude, or type of impacts. Resource 
managers are responding with various risk 
management approaches that can be used to 
plan for uncertainty. Risk management typically 
involves identifying, evaluating, and prioritizing 
current and future climate-related risks and 
vulnerabilities (even those with uncertainties 
that are difficult to characterize with confi-
dence), and assigning effort and resources to 
actions that reduce those risks (USGCRP 2018, 
Ch. 28, KM 3). Future economic and social 
conditions are considered alongside climate 
risks. Often, risk management allows for 
monitoring and adjusting strategies to risks and 
vulnerabilities as they evolve. Addressing equity, 
economics, and social well-being are important 
parts of effective climate risk management 
efforts (Fatoric and Seekamp 2017). 
Two such approaches, that can be used either 
separately or together, are: (i) scenario 
planning, which involves the creation of several 
potential scenarios that might develop in the 
future, based upon a set of variables or projec­
tions; and (ii) adaptive management, in which 
resource managers monitor, evaluate, and adapt 
management practices to changing environ­
mental conditions, such as rising sea levels and 
temperatures. Scenarios are used to assess risks 
over a range of plausible futures that include 
socioeconomic and other trends in addition to 
climate. Adaptive management approaches can 
benefit from technical analysis of hazards, for 
example critical infrastructure vulnerability 
assessment.
In some cases, comprehensive risk management 
helps to avoid adaptation actions that address 
only one climate stressor, such as sea level rise, 
while ignoring other current or future climate 
impacts. Maladaptation arises when actions 
intended to address climate risks result in 
increased vulnerability. For example, if a city 
builds new infrastructure designed to minimize 
the impacts from sea level rise and the sea level 
rise turns out to be higher than expected, the 
infrastructure can actually contribute to flooding 
if stormwater and sewer systems are unable to 
handle the rising water. To avoid maladaptation, 
policymakers and managers can consider a range 
of future scenarios and projected impacts over 
the lifetime of a project and communicate across 
sectors when designing solutions.
Climate change is anticipated to disrupt many 
aspects of life. Globally, more intense extreme 
weather events, flooding, the transmission of 
disease, and failing ecosystems all threaten the 
health and well-being of families and commu­
nities (USGCRP 2018, Summary of Findings). 
Additionally, climate-related risks to energy 
and food production and to the global economy 
are projected to cause large shifts in prices and 
availability of goods and lead to price shocks 
and food insecurity (USGCRP 2018, Ch. 16, 
KM 1 and 3). In American Sāmoa, economic 
 Managing Climate Risks in the Face of Uncertainty
