Indicators and Considerations for Key Sectors  CLIMATE CHANGE IN AMERICAN SA- MOA
41
P I R C A  2 0 2 1
Needs for Research and Information   
University of Hawai‘i researchers worked with staff and 
interns from the American Sa-moa Power Authority to 
install weather data collection stations. Stations such as 
this one collect data that is needed for tracking climate 
indicators and modeling future change. Photo courtesy of 
Chris Shuler. 
of the quality of the data at each station, 
especially temperature data, would provide 
a foundation for determining which data is 
best suited to climate studies. At present, only 
a single stream gauge on the island of Tutuila 
has more than 35 years of observations on 
record unaffected by upstream diversions.
• 
Data detailing specific coastal erosion rates 
and impacts, and a comprehensive shoreline 
inventory – Impacts from coastal erosion in 
American Sāmoa are severe. To enable local 
adaptation projects and infrastructure design, 
islandwide data are needed.
• 
Research and modeling on future saltwater 
intrusion into coastal aquifers – The 
impacts of sea level rise on coastal aquifers 
and potential saltwater intrusion are largely 
unknown. This knowledge gap hinders devel­
opment of effective adaptation strategies for 
water resources.
• 
Island-scale climate projections for mid-
century – Many territorial and federal 
government agencies work on five-year or 
shorter funding cycles, and existing end-of-
century climate projections are not useful for 
shorter-term adaptation and infrastructure 
planning.
• 
Development and trials for stormwater 
management – Plans are needed that account 
for combined sources of flooding, including 
inland flooding and coastal/tidal flooding.
• 
Detailed sea level rise modeling and exposure 
mapping – For exposed shorelines like those 
in American Sāmoa, the existing bathtub 
models of sea level rise are not sufficient for 
assessing exposure. More detailed modeling 
and mapping are needed, including areas of 
projected erosion and the spatial extent of wave 
runup. The University of Hawai‘i is developing 
a relative sea level rise viewer that combines 
island subsidence and global sea level rise and 
provides an anticipated timeline of impacts.
• 
Economic loss from sea level rise scenario 
mapping – Research on the potential 
economic impacts of sea level rise—mapped 
in formats that can be used by policymakers 
and community planners—can inform climate 
adaptation planning at multiple scales (for 
example, the 2017 Hawaii Sea Level Rise 
Vulnerability and Adaptation Report). 
• 
Documented adaptation experiences of 
other Pacific Islands – Literature that 
conveys experiences and lessons learned from 
targeted efforts to address climate-related 
vulnerabilities can assist decision-makers in 
understanding the benefits and risks of such 
measures. For example, there is interest in how 
other Pacific Islands have implemented less 
expensive alternatives to current guidelines 
for hurricane-resistant buildings and flood 
preparation.
