CLIMATE CHANGE IN AMERICAN SA- MOA  Indicators and Considerations for Key Sectors
40
P I R C A  2 0 2 1
 Effects of Extreme Weather & Climate Change on Key Sectors
• 
Assessments of vulnerability – Risks posed 
by extreme weather and climate change 
vary by the vulnerability of the people 
experiencing impacts. Particularly needed 
are assessments of risks that account for the 
socioeconomic and other factors that drive 
vulnerability of people in American Sāmoa 
to climate extremes and changes. Such 
studies can improve understanding of who 
is at greatest risk and inform pre-disaster 
recovery plans. Due to the traditional land 
tenure system in American Sāmoa, where 
extended families communally own land 
that is managed by a chief, or matai, not by 
the government, it is necessary to engage the 
chiefs at the village level in order to create 
effective resilience plans (Page et al. 2012).
• 
Critical infrastructure vulnerability 
assessment – Governments and resource 
managers commonly use various forms of 
vulnerability assessment as a foundational 
tool to tailor solutions and policies to address 
the specific ways critical infrastructure is 
threatened. Assessing climate vulnerability 
involves technical analysis of changing 
hazards, often evaluates exposure, sensitivity, 
and adaptive capacity, and provides rankings 
of the seriousness of various climate risks. 
With the exception of the Climate Related 
Vulnerability Assessment for Transpor­
tation Infrastructure (HHF Planners and 
USACE 2020) completed for the American 
Sāmoa Department of Public Works, 
American Sāmoa currently lacks vulnerability 
assessments of coastal, wastewater, and 
other critical infrastructure. Governments 
and engineers can learn from methods 
of completed assessments and guidance 
developed by engineering associations and 
non-governmental organizations (see for 
example: Canadian Engineering Qualifica­
tions Board 2014; HHF Planners and USACE 
2020).
• 
Centralized expertise to coordinate climate 
adaptation efforts and policies – There is 
a pervasive need for high-level expertise to 
work directly within the Territory’s agencies 
to support mainstreaming climate change 
information, strategies, and actions into their 
existing programs, plans, and projects. It is 
extremely difficult for jurisdictional govern-
ments to identify and hire the high-level 
experts needed. Direct support from the 
federal government could be used to fund 
short-term sit-in positions to help build 
capacity within and across local agencies 
(Spooner et al. 2017).
• 
Educational resources for local K–12 and 
college students and teachers – One of 
the most impactful things that individuals 
can do to help increase preparedness for 
climate change is to talk about the issues 
with their families and communities. Educa­
tional climate science resources specific to 
American Sāmoa are needed to further the 
conversation at home and at school, as well as 
training for educators in climate and environ­
mental science.
• 
Quality controls and expanded coverage in 
climate data records – Stations collecting 
climate data (air temperature, rainfall, wind 
speeds, etc.) have changed location and some 
station records are not continuous. Consistent 
data records of 30 years or more at the same 
location are needed for tracking climate 
trends and changes, and to improve and 
validate future projections. An assessment 
Needs for Research and Information
This assessment identified the following research and information needs, which if met 
could enhance and support responses to extreme weather and climate change:
