Indicators and Considerations for Key Sectors  CLIMATE CHANGE IN AMERICAN SA- MOA
11
P I R C A  2 0 2 1
Long-term scientific observations show a 
warming trend in the climate system and the 
effects of increasing greenhouse gas concentra­
tions in the atmosphere. The factors observed 
to be changing are known as indicators of 
change. Data collected from around the globe 
show, for example:
• 
Globally, annual average temperatures over 
land and oceans have increased over the 
past century; 
• 
Oceania’s five warmest years in the past 
century have occurred since 2005, with the 
warmest year on record being 2019 (NOAA 
2020a); 
• 
Seas are rising, warming, and becoming 
more acidic; 
• 
Some ocean species are moving poleward as 
waters warm; 
• 
Sea ice is decreasing and glaciers, ice caps, 
and snow cover are shrinking.
These and many other changes are well 
documented and are clear signs of a warming 
world (USGCRP 2018, Ch. 1: Overview, Fig. 1.2, 
and Ch. 2, KM 3–7; IPCC 2014, SPM.1.1; also 
see USGCRP Indicators and EPA Indicators 
websites). 
Global Climate Change: 
Causes and Indicators
The causes of climate change
How is climate changing? 
Scientists have researched the physical science 
of climate change for almost two centuries. 
Carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases that 
naturally occur in the atmosphere capture the 
heat from the Sun’s energy that radiates from 
Earth’s surface, preventing some of the heat 
from escaping to space (USGCRP 2018, Ch. 1: 
Overview). Known as the “greenhouse effect,” 
this process keeps Earth habitable for life. 
However, humans have emitted an increasing 
amount of greenhouse gases into the atmo­
sphere since the late 1800s by burning fossil 
fuels (such as oil, gas, and coal) and, to a lesser 
extent, through changes in land-use and global 
deforestation. As a result, the greenhouse effect 
has intensified and driven an increase in global 
surface temperatures and other widespread 
changes in climate. These changes and the rate 
at which they are happening are unprecedented 
in the history of modern civilization (USGCRP 
2018, Ch. 1: Overview; USGCRP 2017, Ch. 2: 
Physical Drivers of Climate Change; IPCC 2014, 
SPM.1.2). 
Although natural climate cycles and other 
factors affect temperatures and weather patterns 
at regional scales, especially in the short term, 
the long-term warming trend in global average 
temperature documented over the last century 
cannot be explained by natural factors alone 
(USGCRP 2018; Ch. 2, Key Message 1). Human 
activities, especially emissions of greenhouse 
gases, are the only factors that can account for 
the amount of warming observed over the last 
century (USGCRP 2018; Ch. 2, KM 1; IPCC 2014, 
SPM.1.2). The largest contributor to human-
caused warming has been carbon dioxide. 
Natural factors alone would have actually had a 
slight cooling effect on climate over the past 50 
years (USGCRP 2018, Ch. 2, KM 1).
Global Climate Change: Causes and Indicators   
