Indicators and Considerations for Key Sectors  CLIMATE CHANGE IN AMERICAN SA- MOA
39
P I R C A  2 0 2 1
• 
Expect greater public health threats 
to students. Children are especially 
vulnerable to heat-related illness, including 
dehydration, heat stress, fever, and exacer­
bated respiratory problems. The increasing 
frequency and intensity of hot days, as well 
as stronger storms, could result in health 
impacts for students (Sarofim et al. 2016), 
especially if the schools are in locations 
more vulnerable to increased heat. 
• 
Utilize locally translated resources to 
better communicate about climate impacts 
with village leaders and educators. It is 
important that Samoans be able to com­
municate about environmental and climate 
change processes in a consistent manner, 
using the same English and Samoan terms 
and definitions. The Resilient Resources 
Samoan Language glossary provides a 
common and accepted set of words and 
definitions to be used by all relevant 
agencies and organizations when discussing 
climate change and resilience issues in 
Samoan. (American Sāmoa Coral Reef 
Advisory Group Project Lotonuu 2018). 
• 
Consider the potential impacts of hotter 
days on student learning and classroom 
design. Research has found that cumulative 
exposure to heat negatively impacts 
students’ ability to learn (Goodman et 
al. 2018). Innovative school building 
designs that reflect local environmental 
conditions—including projected increases 
in air temperature—can benefit students’ 
health and learning outcomes.
• 
Prepare for stronger hurricanes and 
storm surge, and consider options for 
schools and educational facilities at 
the coastline. Erosion, storm surge, and 
coastal inundation from sea level rise 
will likely affect schools along the coast 
or in low-lying areas, causing temporary 
school closures and the need for repairs or 
rebuilding. Continually updating building 
and energy codes is known to improve 
community safety and resilience. Locating 
and designing buildings to accommodate 
sea level rise can avoid costs and protect 
students.
If you are an educator or education decision-maker...
Effects of Extreme Weather & Climate Change on Key Sectors   
