CLIMATE CHANGE IN AMERICAN SA- MOA  Indicators and Considerations for Key Sectors
26
P I R C A  2 0 2 1
What Do Extreme Weather and Climate Change 
Mean for American Sa-moa’s Key Sectors?
The PIRCA suggests the following considerations for managers working in these 10 key sectors 
based on an up-to-date review of published literature on climate science, climate-related risks in 
the Pacific Islands, and risk management approaches.
If you are a water resources or utilities manager…
• 
Prepare for increased land-based pollution 
in groundwater and surface water. Land-
based pollution has been a persistent problem 
affecting drinking water quality in American 
Sāmoa, particularly in the central water 
system (Shuler et al. 2019). The projected 
increase in the frequency and intensity of 
extreme rainfall events means that pathogens 
will be flushed into the water systems at 
greater rates and that spikes in contamination 
of groundwater will likely become more 
frequent and extreme (Wallsgrove and Grecni 
2016; Shuler et al. 2021). 
• 
Monitor salt concentrations in ground-
water wells that already have high chloride 
levels. Some wells on the east side of Tutuila 
and on Aunu‘u island (Izuka 1996; Shuler and 
El-Kadi 2018) have high chloride (or salt) 
levels when there is less rainfall than usual, 
putting them at a greater risk of becoming 
saltier as the sea level rises. The projected 
increase in rainfall and groundwater recharge 
might compensate for this increase in salinity 
(Shuler et al. 2021). Since it is uncertain 
exactly how these wells will change in the 
future, it is important to maintain a robust 
observation and monitoring network for wells 
near the coast. 
• 
Hardening measures to protect electrical, 
water, wastewater, and other infrastructure 
can improve reliability and resilience of 
core services. Sea level rise will cause a rise 
in groundwater in nearshore developed areas. 
Buried utilities in these areas may be subject 
to sub-surface inundation through exposure to 
the saturated zone. This could cause increased 
corrosion of utilities, increased inflow and 
infiltration of wastewater lines, and even 
potential contamination of drinking water 
lines (Habel et al. 2017). Damage to utility 
infrastructure from sea level rise, or major 
storms, can cause cascading impacts on critical 
sectors. Considering both extreme weather 
and sea level rise in the design or reconstruc­
tion of infrastructure can help to avoid future 
high costs and outages.
 Effects of Extreme Weather & Climate Change on Key Sectors
An ASCC student intern takes water quality samples from 
high-level springs on Tutuila. Photo by Christopher Shuler.
