Indicators and Considerations for Key Sectors  CLIMATE CHANGE IN AMERICAN SA- MOA
25
P I R C A  2 0 2 1
Effects of Extreme Weather & Climate Change on American Sa-moa’s People   
dependence on the cannery as a major employer 
means that closures due to drought or changes 
in fishery productivity or global disasters may 
have a disproportionate impact on communities 
(Dworsky and Crawley 1999).
Although climate change is expected to affect 
all people in American Sāmoa, some popu­
lations are disproportionately vulnerable. 
Social, economic, and geographic factors shape 
people’s exposure to climate-related impacts 
and how they are able to respond. Those who 
are already vulnerable, including children, older 
adults, low-income communities, and those 
experiencing discrimination, are at greater 
risk from extreme weather and climate events, 
in part because they are often excluded from 
planning processes (USGCRP 2018, Ch. 14, KM 
2; Ch. 15, KM 1–3; Ch. 28, Introduction). 
Vulnerable populations will likely be affected in 
many ways, including:
• 
Children, who have a higher rate of heat 
stroke and heat-related illness than adults, 
are at greater risk from increasing hot days 
(USGCRP 2016; EPA 2016). 
• 
Older adults and persons with disabilities are 
more vulnerable to extreme events, such as 
storms, that cause power outages or require 
evacuation. Emergency response plans 
specifically accommodating these groups can 
lessen the risks (USGCRP 2016; EPA 2016).
• 
People who work outdoors, such as tourism 
and construction workers, fisherpeople, 
farmers, and other outdoor laborers, are 
some of the first to be exposed to the effects 
of heat and extreme weather (USGCRP 2016; 
Schulte and Chun 2009).
• 
People who live, work, go to school, or 
otherwise spend time in locations that are 
more directly affected by climate risks, such 
as coastal and other flood-prone areas, are 
more likely to experience higher risks to 
health and safety (USGCRP 2016).
• 
Pacific Islanders, including Samoans, have an 
inseparable connection to and derive their 
sense of identity from the lands, territories, 
and resources of their islands (Keener et al. 
2018). Traditional systems of land ownership 
complicate relocation out of ancestral areas 
that are exposed to climate impacts because 
communities prioritize remaining on familial 
land (US Department of Commerce 2012). 
Actions to address the causes and impacts of 
climate change can also affect certain popula­
tions, such as those with lower incomes, more 
than others if such actions do not consider 
existing inequalities (USGCRP 2018, Ch. 11, 
KM 4 and Ch. 28, KM 4). Management and 
emergency response plans that include specific 
accommodations for more vulnerable groups 
can help to address inequalities and save lives, 
and the design of climate-ready infrastructure 
can encourage widespread participation in 
decision-making. 
Global action to significantly cut greenhouse gas 
emissions can reduce climate-related risks and 
increase opportunities for these populations 
in the long term. For example, health-related 
impacts and costs across the United States are 
projected to be 50% lower under a lower warm-
ing scenario (RCP 4.5) than a higher scenario 
(RCP 8.5) (USGCRP 2018). 
