 
 
NATURAL HISTORY GUIDE
 
 
84
44.  Barn owls (lulu) -- spirit of the night 
 
 
The barn owl or lulu is a highly beneficial bird in American Samoa, but some people fear it because they 
associate it with ghosts or aitu.  Its ghostly white appearance and its preference for flying at night 
enhance its reputation as a mysterious bird.  It is not uncommon when driving around Tutuila at night to 
see one perched on a telephone pole or gliding across the road.  Its eerie screech pierces the night and 
can be frightening if you are not expecting it. 
 
Owls are carnivores that usually swallow their prey whole.  A few 
hours after swallowing a rat (isumu) or some other prey, owls 
regurgitate or spit out a pellet of indigestible bones and hair about 
two inches long and one inch in diameter.   By examining these 
pellets, we can determine what the lulu eats.  In the remains of 482 
meals, rats made up most (81%) of those meals, followed by mice 
(9%), geckos (7%), and bones of a few birds (2%), which consisted 
of White Terns (manu sina), Wattled Honeyeaters (iao), mynas, and 
Samoan Starlings (fuia). 
 
No chicken remains were found, but this was not unexpected because 
owls do not generally attack large prey.  Chickens and fruit bats (pe'a) 
are too heavy for an owl to carry and too large to swallow whole.  
Instead, they would typically eat the meat and viscera at the site of the kill.  Soft tissues such as these 
would be totally digested and not be found in pellets.  We have other evidence that one flying fox was 
killed and partially eaten by an owl. 
 
Even though lulu occasionally take a bird, bat or even a chicken, their value in controlling rat 
populations is tremendous.  One pair of owls may catch 2-4 rats per day.  Without owls, Tutuila and 
Manu'a would probably be over-run with rats.  A lulu seen flying through a village should not be feared 
or hated but welcomed, because it will probably mean one less rat near your fale. 
 
 
Gilbert S. Grant 
DMWR 
 
 
 
                   
 
                                                                  
                                 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
