 
 
NATURAL HISTORY GUIDE
 
 
85
45.  Birds of wetland and reef:  Gray Duck and Reef Heron 
  
 
 
Two very different birds depend on Samoa's shallow water habitats.  One is the familiar matu'u, or Pacific 
Reef-Heron, a bird that is seen nearly every day by anyone visiting Samoa's shoreline.  The other is Samoa's 
only duck, the toloa or Gray Duck, a bird that is so rare that most young Samoans have probably never seen 
one.  
 
It comes as a surprise to some people that we don't have more kinds of ducks 
in Polynesia.  After all, ducks like water, and we've got plenty of that, right?  
Well, we've got plenty of salt water, but very few lakes, marshes, or large 
streams of fresh water.  Almost all ducks prefer fresh water, and even the few 
kinds of “sea ducks” eat mostly seagrass and other plants that aren't found 
around Samoa's coral reefs.  Therefore, there aren't many suitable homes for 
toloa in American Samoa.  These suitable homes are the fresh and brackish 
(fresh/saltwater mix) water wetlands. 
 
“Wetlands” is a word that we've been hearing a lot lately.  It refers to areas of land that are permanently or 
periodically flooded or submerged in shallow water.  So much wetland habitat has been lost in the United 
States, primarily through draining and filling, that strict federal laws have been passed protecting wetlands.  
Locally, the Coastal Zone Management Program is responsible for protecting our remaining wetlands, 
which serve vital roles as nurseries for fish and crabs, natural water purification and recharge areas, sites for 
taro production, and homes for rare plants and wildlife.  There used to be extensive mangrove (togo) 
swamps bordering Pago Pago Bay, but these were filled in long ago, before the negative environmental 
consequences of such activities were understood.  The largest remaining wetland areas here are the pala 
lagoons in Nu'uuli and Leone and the marshes and Pala Lake on Aunu'u Island.  There are also many other 
small but important wetlands remaining in both Tutuila and  Manu'a. 
 
All of these areas were once home to toloa.  
However, as wetlands were filled in and as shotguns 
became available, this once-popular game bird 
became rarer and rarer.  During a major survey of 
Samoan birds in 1986, not a single toloa was seen, 
leading to the concern that this bird might be extinct 
in American Samoa.  Happily, this is not the case.  A 
few toloa still live in the territory, mostly on Aunu'u, 
where the village leaders have taken an active role in 
protecting their ducks.  This bird, and the wetlands it 
depends upon, need our continued protection if it is 
ever to recover to healthy population levels. 
 
The toloa is a “dabbling duck”.  This means that it 
doesn't dive under the water to feed, but rather tips down, with its tail in the air and its neck stretching under 
the water, to reach the plants and small insects and snails that it feeds on.  Although it sometimes swims in 
the sea, it does not feed there, and, like most ducks, it does not eat fish. 
 
One interesting thing about the toloa is that is doesn't always nest near the water.  It may build its nest in tall 
dense grass, or place it in a low tree hollow.  Five to ten pale green eggs are laid.  The journey of the young 
ducks from the nest to the safety of the water is a dangerous one, and usually only one or two ducklings 
make it. 
 
