 
 
NATURAL HISTORY GUIDE
 
 
33
16.  Tuna 
 
 
The ocean around us supports a variety of offshore fishes, 
such as masimasi (mahimahi), swordfish, wahoo and marlin, 
but by far the most commercially important of these pelagic 
fishes are the tunas.  The most common in our local waters are 
albacore (apakoa), yellowfin (asiasi), skipjack (atu) and 
dogtooth tuna (tagi) .  
 
Dogtooth tuna are occasionally seen near shore, but tuna 
prefer the open ocean and are wide-ranging species.  These 
ultra-streamlined fish undertake impressive oceanic travels -- 
one skipjack caught here had been tagged near Australia over 
2000 miles away.  But the general movements of tuna in our 
area are not known. 
 
Local fishermen catch tuna in our area by trolling at FADs 
(fish aggregation devices), offshore seamounts, or wherever 
seabird flocks are feeding (the flocks indicate the presence of 
baitfish that the tuna are probably also feeding upon).  In 
recent years, commercial catches of locally-caught tuna have 
increased in the longline fishery that targets albacore using 
long lengths (extending 5-40 miles) of monofilament longline 
with baited hooks. 
 
Given that American Samoa has two major tuna canneries and 
we are the No. 1 port in the United States in terms of value of 
fish landed (about $200,000,000 per year), it is somewhat 
surprising to realize that few of the fish canned here are 
actually caught within American Samoa's waters.  That's 
because tuna are not particularly abundant in our area, so 
local catches delivered to the canneries are a small fraction of 
the 200,000 tons of tuna processed at the canneries each year.  
Commercial quantities of tuna are generally located 1000s of 
miles away from American Samoa, so the big purse seiners 
and foreign longliners that you see docked in Pago Pago 
Harbor generally do not fish locally.  Instead, they must 
travel for about 1 week just to reach their distant fishing 
grounds.  The reason why these boats deliver their catch to 
the canneries here is simply because the tuna canned in 
American Samoa can enter US markets tariff-free as “Made 
in USA”, and the US is one of the largest consumers of tuna. 
 
A rather enjoyable feature about tuna is that their meat generally lacks parasites, so people eat raw tuna 
in a variety of forms (oka, sashimi). 
 
 
P.Craig, NPS      
