 
 
NATURAL HISTORY GUIDE
 
 
44
pollen present in facial hair and in feces.  These data help 
scientists determine which plants are important because they are 
preferred, nutritious and/or available year-round. 
 
At least 42 plant species provide food for the pe'a vao and pe'a 
fanua in American Samoa.  These consist mostly of forest tree 
species, such as aoa (Ficus prolixa and Ficus obliqua), asi 
(Syzigium inophylloides), a’amati’e (Elaeocarpus ulianus), ifi 
(Inocarpus fagifer), fetau (Callophyllum inophyllum), mamalava 
(Planchonella samoensis), and tava (Pometia pinnata).  The bats 
also eat fruits grown by man such as mango (Mangifera indica) 
and ulu (Artocarpus altilis), but damage to crops is limited if 
fruits are harvested before they ripen on the tree.  Also, when 
you hear the bats squealing in banana patches at night, it’s 
usually because they are fighting over the banana flowers, not 
the fruits.  Despite the broad similarity in their diets, pe'a fanua 
exploit flower resources and feed on trees (especially domestic 
ones) closer to human habitations more often than do pe'a vao. 
 
The rewards of the interaction between flying foxes and plants are certainly not one-sided, because the 
plants and forest also benefit from being visited by bats.  When the pe'a fanua visit patches of vavae 
flowers (Ceiba pentandra), for example, they help transfer pollen from one tree to another and that, in 
turn, enhances fruit formation and production.  Flying foxes are also important for seed dispersal.  When 
they consume fruits with small seeds (such as aoa), some seeds that get swallowed do not get digested 
but are carried and deposited away from the tree source.  In American Samoa, flying foxes are the only 
animals that can carry fruits with large seeds, such as 
ifi, over distances and uphill.  Studies of bat 
movements on Tutuila reveal that bats may commute 
between feeding areas up to 40 km apart during a 
single night.  Seeds that are transported can colonize 
naturally bare or cleared areas and aid in the 
revegetation of gaps in forests where trees may have 
fallen from disease, age, or bad weather. 
 
It may bother us that flying foxes eat some of the fruit 
that we grow for ourselves, but these bats are tireless 
workers that help maintain the health of our 
rainforest, and they are fun to watch. 
 
 
Ruth C. B. Utzurrum 
DMWR 
Bats flying above their daytime roost.
