 
 
NATURAL HISTORY GUIDE
 
 
22
9.  Palolo swarming 
 
 
Once or twice a year, palolo swarm to the surface of the sea in great numbers.  Samoans eagerly await 
this night and scoop up large amounts of this delicacy along the shoreline with hand nets.  This gift from 
the sea was traditionally greeted with necklaces made from the fragrant moso’oi flower and the night of 
the palolo was and still remains a happy time of celebration.  The rich taste of palolo is enjoyed raw or 
fried with butter, onions or eggs, or spread on toast. 
 
Palolo is the edible portion of a polychaete worm (Eunice viridis)    
that lives in shallow coral reefs throughout the south central  
Pacific, although they do not swarm at all of these locations.  This 
phenomenon is well known in Samoa, Rarotonga, Tonga, Fiji, the 
Solomon Islands and Vanuatu. 
 
Palolo are about 12 inches long and live in burrows dug into the coral 
pavement on the outer reef flat.  They are composed of two distinct 
sections (see drawing).  The front section is the basic segmented 
polychaete with eyes, mouth, etc., followed by a string of segments 
called the “epitoke” that contain reproductive gametes colored blue-
green (females) or tan (males).  Each epitoke segments bear a tiny 
eyespot that can sense light (that's why islanders are able to use a 
lantern to attract the palolo to their nets). 
  
When it comes time to spawn, palolo will back out of their burrows and release the epitoke section from 
their body.  The epitokes then twirl around in the water in vast numbers and look like dancing spaghetti.  
Around daybreak, the segments dissolve and release the 
eggs and sperm that they contain. The fertilized eggs 
hatch into small larvae that drift with the plankton until 
settling on a coral reef to begin life anew. 
 
The swarming of palolo is a classic example of the 
coordinated mass spawning of a simple marine organism.  
The worms emerge from their burrows during a specific 
phase of the moon, but the actual date is a bit complicated.  
The swarms occur on the evenings of the last quarter 
moon of spring or early summer.  In Samoa, this is seven 
days after the full moon in October or November.  
Swarming occurs for two or three consecutive nights with 
the second night usually having the strongest showing. 
 
Palolo usually appear here in October, but sometimes in 
November or sometimes during both months.  This difference is due to the fact that there are 
approximately thirteen lunar months in one calendar year and the palolo use primarily the moon to time 
their spawning activity.  If instead they always spawned every twelve lunar months, their time of 
spawning would occur earlier every year.  After a few years, they would be spawning in August or July.  
In order to make up for this difference, the palolo will delay spawning in some years to the thirteen lunar 
month. 
 
The fact that palolo adjust their spawning time means that there are other factors beside the moon that 
determine the time of year they begin to mature and are ready to release their epitokes.  Several studies 
Palolo underwater. 
