NATURAL HISTORY GUIDE 
 
 
6
concern' in the Territory include the sheath-tailed bat, 3 birds (Spotless Crake, Friendly Ground 
Dove, Many-colored Fruit Dove), several land snails, and others. 
 
Pests and weeds (invasive non-native species).  There are many:  rats, 3 bird species (2 mynas and 
bulbuls), feral pigs, dogs, cats, toads, house gecko, tilapia and molly fishes, African and 
predatory snails, various insects, about 250 alien species of vascular plants (many of them weed 
species), and others. 
 
Dangerous species.  Few.  On land, no poisonous snakes, but a bite 
from a large 8-inch centipede can be extremely painful.  In the 
ocean, sharks are generally not a problem but stepping on the 
poisonous spine of a stonefish can be a serious medical 
emergency although this rarely happens.  Consumers of fish 
should note that ciguatera poisoning has been found (infrequently) in several snappers (locally 
called mu) and a few other fish species.  Also, avoid eating any fish or invertebrate caught in 
Pago Pago Harbor, because they are contaminated with heavy metals and other pollutants. 
 
Tropical diseases.  Malaria is not present, but two other mosquito-transmitted diseases can occur here:  
dengue fever (caused by a virus) and filariasis (elephantiasis, caused by a parasitic nematode 
worm).  However, the chance of getting either by a visitor is slight (see chapter on mosquitoes). 
Leptospirosis, a common tropical bacterial disease spread through contact with the urine of 
infected animals (pigs, dogs, cats, rats), is fairly common among local residents (17% recent 
infection history); most people have mild flu-like symptoms but it can be fatal. 
 
Chronology of local environmental events.  See Appendix 1. 
 
Conservation areas as of 2005: 
 
             Site1                                                                    Year       Location                        km2               acres 
             Rose Atoll National Wildlife Sanctuary  
1973    Rose Atoll              
158.8          39,251 
               Fagatele Bay National Marine Sanctuary 
1985    Tutuila                    
0.7               161 
               National Park of American Samoa2  
1988    Tutuila, Ofu, Ta'u           42.6         10,520 
               Vaoto Territorial Marine Park                 
1994    Ofu                                  0.5               120 
               Sea Turtle/Marine Mammal Sanctuary3             2003       All territorial waters (0-3 miles offshore)  
               Community-based marine protected areas        -------      several villages                ---                  ---  
 
1All fishing is prohibited at Rose Atoll, but traditional subsistence fishing is permitted at  
                the other sites.  The village marine protected areas have been periodically opened to fishing. 
 
2An expansion of the National Park on Olosega and Ofu islands was pending in 2005. 
 
3Governor’s Executive Order No. 005-2003 established the turtle/marine mammal sanctuary. 
 
Other “special management areas” in the Territory include Pago Pago Harbor, Nu'uuli Pala 
Lagoon and Leone wetlands. 
P.Craig, NPS 
 
 
 
 
