 
 
NATURAL HISTORY GUIDE
 
 
39
While an occasional spout of whale-breath 
can be seen in our local waters, you can also 
hear the whales if you stick your head in the 
water.  Humpbacks are famous for their 
unique “songs”.  Yes, whales sing!  During 
mating season, male humpbacks sing to 
either attract females or to defend their 
territory from other male whales, much like 
birds do with their own songs. 
 
The whale's song is haunting and complex.  
It sounds like a eerie series of chirps, 
squeaks, whistles and grunts.  I know that “grunts” don't seem like they could make much of a song, but 
you just have to take my word for it.  It is unlike anything you have ever heard.  Scuba divers can hear 
the singing if the they hold their breath and pay attention.  Snorkelers can also hear the songs, but they 
have to dive about 10 feet deep to get below the noisy surface layer of water.  The song lasts about 10-
20 minutes, it has a beginning, middle and end, and all males of the same stock sing the same song.  
Biologists can therefore identify where a whale comes from by listening to its song.  For example, 
Hawaiian humpbacks sing a different song (than the Samoan humpbacks), because they belong to a 
different stock of whales that migrates between Hawaii and Alaska.  The whales' song is one of the 
world's wonders of nature and it's at our doorstep. 
 
Humpback whales are currently listed as an endangered species 
because their world-wide populations were decimated by whalers in 
the 1800's and 1900's.  By the time commercial whaling was stopped 
in 1966, 95% of our stock (Stock-E) had been killed.  Recovery of 
these whales has been unexpectedly slow, probably due to continued 
whaling by Soviet factory ships as late as 1972 and a subsistence 
harvest of these whales occurred in Tonga up to 1978.  In any event, 
whales in American Samoa remain few in number, and in some years 
hardly any are seen here. 
 
Because humpbacks use our waters to give birth to their young, it is 
important to protect them when they are here.  Enjoy their presence, 
but don't pester them.  Avoid the temptation to boat right up to them 
or follow them at close quarters.  Boaters, divers and swimmers 
should stay at least 100 yards away, and watch from there.   
 
P.Craig, NPS 
 
 
 
 
 
           BREACHING 
             PEC SLAP 
            TAIL SLAP 
  Leaping partly out of the water 
  and landing with a big splash 
    Flapping its pectoral fin 
 Slapping its tail on the water 
 
