 
 
NATURAL HISTORY GUIDE
 
 
83
43.  Our strange winter visitor, the Cuckoo (aleva) 
 
 
The aleva or Long-tailed Cuckoo is a very odd bird, no doubt about it.  For one thing, when the weather 
starts to get cold in its summer home, the aleva migrates north for the winter.  For another, it has a 
highly unusual home life:  it doesn't build its own nest or care for its own young, but abandons its eggs 
in the nests of other birds, to be raised not only by strangers, but by completely different kinds of birds.  
The aleva lives and breeds in New Zealand for half of the year.  But when winter approaches, around 
March or April, the aleva leaves its chilly home islands, and flies north into sunny Polynesia.  In fact, it 
is the only land bird to migrate north to spend the winter with 
us (although a few aleva may be found here year-round).  
The aleva's winter range extends all the way from Palau on 
the west to Pitcairn Island on the east, but the largest 
numbers winter in Fiji, Samoa, and Tonga.  Here it can be 
found on any island, from the mountainous interiors of the 
largest high islands to the coastal vegetation of tiny atolls.  
Wherever it ends up, the aleva feeds mostly on large insects, 
including caterpillars and stick insects, but also small lizards. 
 
The aleva is a hard bird to see, usually creeping without a sound through dense foliage.  In fact, we 
most often see aleva because they are being chased by other birds, especially the iao (Wattled 
Honeyeater).  Iao seem to hate aleva, and chase them vigorously, with loud scolding cries.  It is very 
interesting to try to figure out why they do this.  There are at least three possibilities.  It may be that 
aleva will eat eggs if they get the chance; however, this has never been observed.  Second, in flight the 
aleva looks much like a hawk, with its pointed wings and long tail.  Perhaps iao mistake the aleva for a 
hawk, and think they are chasing a dangerous predator away.  But there are no hawks in Samoa. 
Therefore, this explanation would mean that iao still have an instinctive fear of hawk-like birds 
thousands of years after they last saw a hawk (which was probably when the ancestors of our iao came 
here from Fiji).  The last explanation seems even more far-fetched.  This is that the iao chases the aleva 
because it is afraid that the cuckoo will lay its eggs in the iao's nest.  To understand this possibility, we 
must discuss the strange breeding behavior of the aleva. 
 
Like many other members of the cuckoo family, the aleva is a nest parasite.  This means that it secretly 
lays its eggs in other birds' nests.  The unlucky host birds think that the cuckoo egg is their own, and 
raise it alongside their own babies.  Usually the baby cuckoo is much larger than the babies of its hosts, 
who are unable to compete and starve to death.  Many New Zealand birds, including honeyeaters related 
to the iao, recognize the aleva and chase it away.  This makes a lot of sense in New Zealand, where the 
aleva breeds.  But the aleva never breeds on its wintering grounds in Polynesia.  Therefore, the iao has 
no reason to fear that the aleva will lay eggs in its nest.  Could there be an instinctive hatred of cuckoos 
in all members of the honeyeater family?  Like many questions in biology, this one would be hard to 
answer, but it's still fun to think about. 
 
Many older Samoans say that aleva used to be much more common than they are today.  The aleva is 
now a rare sight on Tutuila.  It's hard to know just how rare the bird really is because of its secretive 
habits.  If you see one, consider yourself lucky, and take a moment to think about the many mysteries in 
the life of this strange visitor to our shores. 
 
Pepper Trail 
DMWR 
