 
 
NATURAL HISTORY GUIDE
 
 
34
17.  Turtles In trouble 
 
 
In Samoan folklore, sea turtles were believed to have the power to save fishermen who were lost at sea 
by bringing them safely to shore.  The Samoan word for sea turtle, “I'a sa,” translates literally to “sacred 
fish”, presumably because of this ability. 
 
Samoans have traditionally harvested sea turtles for food, and the shell 
was often made into bracelets, combs, fishing hooks, and also was used 
in the headpiece worn by a princess during important dance 
ceremonies.  Turtles were incorporated into Samoan songs and art, and 
there are even turtle petroglyphs (rock carvings) in Faga'itua and 
Leone.  And, of course, there's the legend about the Turtle and Shark 
that appear in the sea at Vaitogi when villagers sing a special song. 
 
It therefore seems extra unfortunate that turtle numbers in Samoa have 
declined so much that they are now considered endangered species.  
Although it is difficult to determine how many are left, it is clear that 
few females lay eggs each year in the Territory.  This drop parallels the worldwide decline of sea turtles 
due to overharvest, loss of nesting beaches, and incidental kills in fishing gear.  Pacific populations of 
one of our species (hawksbills) are “rapidly approaching extinction” according to a recent scientific 
review. 
 
Two turtle species, the green and hawksbill, are the most frequently found turtles in our local waters.  
The hawksbill or “laumei uga” (Eretmochelys imbricata) is usually the species that nests on Tutuila 
beaches.  This is a solitary nester, and perhaps only 1 or 2 hawksbill females now use a suitable beach.  
The hawksbill is occasionally poisonous -- in the late 1950s, people in Aunu'u got very sick after eating 
one. 
 
Our other species is the green sea turtle (Chelonia mydas), named after the color of its fat.  It is also 
found around our islands, but it nests primarily at Rose Atoll.  These long-lived turtles have rather 
complicated life cycles that involve repeated 
long-distance migrations to and from 
American Samoa.  They start life as eggs 
buried in beach sand.  Once a female has laid 
her first group of about 100 eggs, she will 
return at 2-week intervals to lay more.  In 
about 60 days, the eggs hatch and the little 
turtles dart into the ocean.  Where they go is 
not known, but eventually they take up 
residence at some feeding area that may be 
far away from American Samoa. 
 
There they remain for some 20-25 years until 
they become sexually mature, at which time 
they return to the very same beach where they 
came from.  After laying eggs there, the adult females then turn around and go back to their distant 
feeding grounds.  That's the basic pattern for most sea turtle species throughout the world.  Swim far 
away to some nesting beach, then swim back to their feeding area, back and forth every few years 
thereafter. 
 
