 
 
NATURAL HISTORY GUIDE
 
 
53
27.  Snakes In Samoa ! 
 
 
Snakes in Samoa?  You bet.  Two kinds, one right here on Tutuila Island and the other on Ta'u Island.  
Fortunately, neither is the dreaded brown tree snake (more about that below).  Also fortunately, neither 
is poisonous, both mind their own business, and they are no threat to anyone. 
 
On Tutuila, we have an unusually small black snake that looks like an 
odd earthworm about 6 inches long.  A closer inspection reveals that 
it has tiny scales.  It's called the potted soil snake or blind burrowing 
snake (Ramphotyphlops braminus), because it has almost no eyes and 
it burrows through the soil.  This secretive nocturnal snake is 
occasionally found by someone digging in their garden.  It eats small 
soil creatures like termites and insect larvae. 
 
This harmless snake is widely distributed around the world, but it is not native to our islands.  It was 
probably introduced here when its eggs were carried in the soil attached to some imported plants or 
machinery.  In 1993, it was found in the Tafuna area.  Others were found in the Pago Pago area in 2001.     
 
The other snake found infrequently on Ta'u Island is the gata or Pacific boa (Candoia bibroni).  It also 
occurs in western Samoa.  At one time it inhabited Tutuila Island (its bones were found there) but it 
went extinct for unknown reasons.  On Ofu, an older resident remembers seeing one there when he was 
a child. 
 
The Pacific boa is more commonly found on islands closer to Indonesia; American Samoa appears to be 
the eastward limit of its distribution.  It can grow to a respectable length of 3 to 6 feet and is tan or 
darkly colored, but its coloration can be variable.  This species is usually found in forests, it is active 
mainly at night, and it probably eats lizards, rats, and small birds and bird eggs. 
 
The Pacific boa looks a lot like another undesirable snake species, the brown tree snake (Boiga 
irregularis), which we don't have in Samoa and hopefully never will.  You may have heard that the 
brown tree snake invaded Guam and caused 
havoc there.  It wiped out Guam's native 
bird species and helped decimate their fruit 
bat populations by eating the young bats 
left hanging in the trees when the adults 
flew off to find food.   
 
Parents in Guam were even advised to keep 
their infants and small children away from 
this snake because it is somewhat 
poisonous and occasionally has been caught 
lunching on a baby's arm.  How's that for a 
reptilian nightmare? 
 
Well, not to fear.  We do not have the brown tree snake in Samoa.  So, if you see a large snake on Ta'u 
island, don't kill it.  However, if you see one on Tutuila Island, it is very important that you send it to 
DMWR for identification.  It is essential that we keep the brown tree snake out of American Samoa.  
Several of them have already slipped into Hawaii hidden in air cargo shipments from Guam.  The 
snakes will crawl into the cargo or onto the plane's landing gear and then go wherever the plane goes. 
 
Not in American Samoa yet ! 
Brown tree snake 
