 
 
NATURAL HISTORY GUIDE
 
 
72
mouthful) and low shrubs like toitoi.  Lupe eat leaves from many different trees, including au'auli, 
a'amati'e and ifi, although in almost all cases they like the young leaves best.  This makes sense, since 
young leaves are probably the most tender and easy to digest, and may have fewer poisonous chemicals 
than old leaves.  Lupe also like flowers on occasion, both from trees like ala'a or ma'ali and from shrubs 
such as ti.  
 
Obviously, the lupe is not a picky eater.  This may explain why it is such a widespread and successful 
bird, since it will eat food from both coastal and mountain areas.  In fact, after Cyclone Val in 1991, 
many lupe on the coast near Vaitogi survived by eating the fruits of toitoi.  Thus, in times of limited 
food, it can find food where other birds might not.  At other times, lupe may eat unusual foods (like 
leaves and flowers) to get certain nutrients, just the way people sometimes take vitamin pills to 
supplement their regular diets.  Lupe are also able to eat some fruits that smaller birds cannot, and so 
may be important for spreading these trees to new areas or even among different islands. 
 
Since the lupe is such an adaptable bird, 
and has been able to recover both from 
human activities like hunting and from 
natural disturbances like the tropical 
cyclones in the early 1990s, it may seem 
surprising that there are many fewer now 
than in earlier times.  The most dramatic 
evidence for this are the many tia seulupe, 
or star mounds, that were built by ancient 
Samoans.  A survey discovered the remains 
of over 60 tia in the eastern part of Tutuila 
alone.  Each tia is a massive stone platform 
with one or more arms extending from it.  
Pigeon-catching huts were built on top of 
the platform, and village chiefs competed to catch the most birds, using a tame lupe as a decoy, and a 
long-handled net to sweep up the flocks of pigeons that were attracted.  Early missionary accounts tell 
how whole villages would spend weeks camping out in the forest around the tia, and that pigeon-
catching season was a time of feasting and partying.  Lupe must have been very abundant to support this 
elaborate cultural activity.  While the tia certainly had ritual and religious importance in addition to their 
use as pigeon-catching sites, the latest studies suggest that pigeon-catching was central to their role in 
ancient Samoan society.  A well-preserved star mound, with explanatory signs, can be visited in 
Ottoville, next to the Fatuoaiga Catholic Church compound. 
 
Now, though, the rainforest that once covered the Tafuna Plain have been cut down.  This type of 
lowland forest, with its abundant mamalava, tava, maota, mamala, and aoa trees, was almost certainly 
the best habitat for lupe in American Samoa. Today, only scattered aoa remain, and lupe are seldom 
seen in Tafuna.  Even though aoa is a valuable food for lupe, we can see that it was the whole forest, 
and not just one kind of tree, that made the Tafuna rainforest so valuable to lupe.  However, this large 
area of habitat is gone, and it seems we will never see as many lupe as did the first Samoans.  Perhaps 
more than any other animal, the lupe is of irreplaceable importance to Samoa, both because of its natural 
role in spreading rainforest seeds, and its cultural role in the stories, proverbs, and heritage of the 
Samoan people.  
 
Pepper Trail,  Joshua Seamon 
DMWR 
