 
 
NATURAL HISTORY GUIDE
 
 
63
33.  Fungi:  the vital decomposers 
 
 
What do leaf spots, beer, itchy feet, rotting trees, fresh bread, 
mold, and pizza have in common?  Fungus!  Different kinds of 
fungi (the pleural of fungus is fungi) can cause diseases in plants 
and humans, make alcohol and raise bread.  Certain fungi 
(mushrooms) are cooked and eaten. 
 
Fungi are sometimes used by Samoans to make fermented drinks, 
such as pulouaitu (ghost hat).  This drink is made from 
mushrooms growing out of cattle dung that are boiled, strained, 
and drunk to cause an alcohol-like feeling.  Alafa is an interesting 
forest mushroom (Mycena sp.?) that glows in the dark and has 
actually been used to illuminate or mark trails at night.  Children 
also create a strange effect by sticking alafa on their faces.  
Several other unrelated organisms also produce this 
bioluminescence, or biological light, by metabolizing a chemical in their bodies called luciferin.  
Different organisms produce different colors of light: green for jellyfish, greenish-yellow for fireflies, 
red for railroad worms, and greenish-blue for glow worms and mushrooms.  Scientists continue to study 
this light-producing process, which is extremely efficient (almost 90%). 
 
People used to think fungi were a kind of plant and placed them in the plant kingdom.  But fungi are so 
different from any other organism, they were given their own kingdom.  Most fungi (except yeasts and a 
few others) are made up of many cells arranged in long strands called hyphae.  All the hyphae together 
make up the mycelium, or body of the fungus.  As the hyphae grow through their food, a plant for 
example, they release enzymes.  These enzymes dissolve the plant cell walls and the fungus mycelium 
absorbs the nutrients from the plant. 
 
 
We are usually aware of fungi only when they damage 
something.  That’s because they live inside the things they 
are eating.  Sometimes we see their white mycelium in rotted 
wood, but most often we don’t see them until they form 
"fruiting bodies".  These fruiting bodies make thousands and 
thousands of spores that grow into new fungi wherever they 
land.  Sometimes these spores are brightly colored, like the 
blue, green, or white mold on old food, or the black mold in 
the bathroom shower.  Other times we find mushrooms, 
another kind of fruiting body, growing on the ground or from 
trees.  Fruiting bodies are an indication that the insides of the 
trees are being eaten.  These fungi may be thin and delicate, 
tough and rubbery, or hard as wood.  The “ear fungus” 
(Auricularia) is brownish-purple, and thin like an ear, while 
the “tooth fungus” (Flavodon) is bright chartreuse with short 
tooth-like pores on which the spores are formed.   
 
Most wood decay fungi are called conks, or shelf fungi.  One 
of the most common “wood rotters” in American Samoa is 
the artist’s conk (Ganoderma australe).  This fungus grows 
out from the tree in the shaped of a fan.  It has a light brown 
top that is sometimes dusty with spores from the conks above 
