 
 
NATURAL HISTORY GUIDE
 
 
56
29.  Disappearing land snails 
 
 
Snails belong to the second largest group of animals on 
earth, the mollusks.  Only the arthropods (insects, 
crustaceans and their relatives) have more known species.  
Snails are found just about everywhere – the ocean, streams, 
lakes, and on land.  Over 90 native species of land snails 
occur in the Samoan Archipelago.  Of these, 64 occur in 
western Samoa and 47 in American Samoa (many are found 
in both places).  Slugs, which are snail-like mollusks that 
have no shell, also occur locally, but none is a native species 
-- all are recent introductions to our islands. 
 
Many of our native land snails are found only on our islands – that is, they 
are endemic to the Samoan Archipelago.  Some of them even occur only 
on a single island, so they are endemic to that island.  Their shells come in 
all shapes and sizes – flat, tall, rounded or spiraled.  Some live in trees, 
where they may eat dying leaves. Others live on the ground and probably 
feed on dead leaves.  Together with fungi and other microorganisms that 
help to decompose the leaf debris, snails contribute to the cycling of 
nutrients through the ecosystem. 
 
We do not know much about the basic biology of these land snails.  Some species have separate males 
and females, but others are hermaphrodites, where each snail is both male and female.  However, most 
hermaphroditic snails still reproduce by mating with another individual – each snail can act 
simultaneously as a male and as a female, or in some species the snails take turns being males and 
females.  Most snails lay eggs, but some give birth to live young – miniature snails that simply crawl 
away.  The snails that produce live young tend to grow and reproduce very slowly – some of the tree 
snails may take over a year to reach full size and may live as long as 5-10 years, producing only 10-20 
young per year.  This contrasts with egg-laying species that probably grow much quicker, produce many 
eggs, but do not live as long. 
 
There are three possible ways that land snails could have crossed the 
ocean to get to our remote islands.  First, they might have been 
carried over the ocean from a distant continent – or from another 
island – on rafts of driftwood or fallen logs.  But salt kills land 
snails, so this seems unlikely.  Perhaps they were carried here by 
birds.  Sometimes snails get caught up in the feathers of birds, 
especially if they are really small snails.  And third, they might have 
been blown by the wind.  Scientists have found that very small 
snails can indeed be blown long distances by strong winds. A small snail attached to a leaf, caught up in 
a cyclone, could be blown hundreds, perhaps thousands of miles across the ocean.  Through 
evolutionary time (millions of years), these seemingly unlikely events had only to happen very 
occasionally in order for a few land snails to eventually colonize our islands. 
 
Once the land snails arrived and managed to survive, they began to evolve to local conditions.  Some 
species changed and became so different from their ancestors that scientists now identify them as 
different species.  Others evolved into more than one species.  This is how the Samoan islands came to 
have many land snail species found nowhere else on earth – they evolved after they arrived here. 
 
