 
 
NATURAL HISTORY GUIDE
 
 
28
reeftop, and as they munch away on the algae-covered rocks, they remind me of a herd of miniature 
cows feeding in a distant pasture. 
 
Many other species of coral reef fish are also algae eaters, and two general patterns of feeding have 
evolved among these species.  One is for a species to become territorial and fiercely guard its own algal 
patch, the other is to be non-territorial and roam around the reef looking for an unguarded patch of algae 
to eat.  To an underwater observer, this dual approach to feeding is readily visible -- most of the reef is 
picked clean of all edible algae and looks like bare rock, except where a territorial fish guards its lush 
algal plot. 
 
The feisty alogo defends its plot from all competitors, so the turf algae grows well there and provides all 
the food the alogo needs.  Protection of this garden doesn't come cheaply, however.  The alogo must 
defend its territory every minute of the day from other fish that lurk nearby, waiting for a chance to 
sneak in and chow down.   
 
That's where the alogo's sharp blade comes in 
handy (see photo).  The alogo will threaten to 
viciously sideswipe an intruder with this weapon.  
Most other fish heed the alogo's warning and back-
off quickly.  It's mostly a bluffing game played 
repeatedly through the day, and rarely does anyone 
get hurt. 
 
Other aspects of the alogo's behavior are 
fascinating.  Every evening at dusk, all the alogo migrate off the reeftop to deeper waters where they 
will spend the night sleeping in crevices to escape being eaten by predators like sharks (malie) and jacks 
(malauli, ulua).  At dawn, they return by the same route.  Their migrations to and from the reeftop look 
like rush-hour traffic on an underwater highway.   
 
The alogo is a popular Samoan food fish and it is one the most important species of reef fish caught, 
accounting in some years for up to 30% (by weight) of all reef fish caught in the nearshore subsistence 
fishery.  Most are caught by spear fishermen, particularly at night when the fish are sleeping in reef 
crevices.  Daytime spear fishermen have a much harder time catching them, because the alogo tend to 
stay just out of spearing range. 
 
P.Craig, NPS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
blade
