 
 
NATURAL HISTORY GUIDE
 
 
61
32. Mosquitoes, Filariasis & Dengue Fever 
 
 
Mosquitoes may play a role in the grand scheme of things, but I’m not really 
keen on the idea that they want to suck my blood.  Worse still, they can 
infect us with two diseases in American Samoa -- more about that shortly. 
 
At least 12 species of mosquitoes (namu) occur in American Samoa.  Most 
are common across the western South Pacific region, but some are endemic 
to the Samoan islands (Aedes upolensis, Coquillettidia samoaensis, 
Ochlerotatus samoanus, Oc. tutuilae) and a few are newly introduced. 
 
Their life cycle involves several stages, one is the irritating adult mosquito, 
but their juveniles live in water.  To reproduce, the adult female needs to 
obtain a blood meal (from you) to develop her eggs.  She then lays her eggs 
in quiet puddles of water where they hatch and grow.  The larvae breath air, 
so they generally hang around at the water surface but will wiggle quite 
actively when disturbed.  After a week or two, the larvae pupate (a resting 
stage) and then emerge as flying adults.  Females may live for 2-3 weeks and 
lay several clutches of eggs (each requires a blood meal).  Only the female 
mosquito searches for a blood meal; the males (the ones with fuzzy 
antennae) feed on plant nectar.  Also, not all the mosquitoes are after you 
personally -- some species seek out birds as their preferred blood meal. 
 
The female mosquito finds you by following signals given off by your body such as body heat, odors 
and carbon dioxide.  Light and movement also help her zero-in on you.  She then sinks her long and thin 
mouth parts into your skin and sucks out a drop of blood, engorging so much that she can barely fly 
away.  During the biting process, she secretes saliva into the cut to prevent the blood from coagulating.  
Your body’s reaction to this saliva is what causes the bite to itch and swell. 
 
Mosquitoes can carry two diseases in American Samoa: filariasis and dengue.  Both can cause serious 
problems.  These diseases are spread by specific mosquito species:  dengue (principally Aedes 
polynesiensis and Ae. aegypti) and filariasis (mainly Aedes polynesiensis, and Oc. samoanus). 
 
Filariasis, also known as elephantiasis (tutupa, mumu), is caused by parasitic nematode worms called 
filariae.  When an infected mosquito bites you, these minute worms crawl from the mosquito’s 
mouthparts onto your body and into the cut.  This is not a particularly efficient way to enter your body, 
so the number of them transmitted from a single mosquito bite is probably limited.  Multiple mosquito 
bites by infected A. polynesiensis may be needed before a person develops the full-blown disease.  The 
worms lodge in a person’s lymphatic system where they can live for 4-6 years and produce millions of 
minute larvae (microfilariae).  These larvae circulate in your blood and are sucked up by other 
mosquitoes that bite you and thus can be spread to other people.  In severe cases, filariasis can cause a 
very large swelling of arms, legs or genitals.   
 
The number of people infected in American Samoa is considerable.  In two surveys, people in several 
villages here were examined for filariasis and 17% (in 1999) and 13% (in 2002) were found to be  
currently or recently infected.  But not all these people have swollen limbs.  In general, about half of the 
people who are infected show no symptoms of the disease, but they may develop them as they get older.  
Our local Public Health Department together with the Center for Disease Control has joined a 
worldwide program to reduce filariasis by giving every person on island a medication that kills the 
