NATURAL HISTORY GUIDE 
 
 
9
It is curious that there are no cyclones along the equator or around South America.  This occurs because 
cyclones require two general conditions to develop:  (1) warm ocean waters at least 800 F (26.50 C) to 
fuel the cyclone, and (2) enough Coriolis force (caused by the earth’s rotation) to provide stability and 
spin to a developing storm.  Coriolis force is weakest along the equator, so developing storms there 
remain unstable and do not develop into cyclones.  South America has few cyclones due to cool water 
temperatures (upwelling along the west coast) or other climatic conditions (on the east coast) that are 
not conducive for cyclone development. 
 
 
Tracks of tropical cyclones during the 10-year period 1994-2003. 
 
Cyclones are a regular but erratic feature of the environment in our part of the world, so it is likely that 
native species inhabiting American Samoa are able to cope with cyclone impacts and recover, given 
enough time and assuming that their recovery is not jeopardized by human-related conditions such as 
habitat loss due to human population increases, competition by invasive alien species, pollution, or 
changing environmental conditions due to global climate change. 
 
Returning to the topic of seasons, some plants and animals in Samoa schedule their activities, such as 
flowering or spawning, according to the seasons.  These biological events tend to occur over a much 
longer period in the tropics compared to colder regions of the world, because the distinction between 
our two seasons is not great and growing conditions here are generally good year-round.  Nevertheless, 
seasonal patterns of flowering and fruiting mean times of abundance or scarcity for some of our native 
wildlife, particularly the fruit bats (pe'a) and Pacific pigeon (lupe). 
 
Some animals schedule their seasonal migrations to our islands to avoid winters elsewhere in the world.  
We see more golden plovers (tuli) and tourists during the October to March period when they flee 
winter in the northern hemisphere, while humpback whales (tofola) visit us in August-October when 
they escape winter in the southern hemisphere. 
 
P.Craig, NPS 
