 
 
NATURAL HISTORY GUIDE
 
 
48
(iao), and the pretty little parrot (segavao) found in Manu'a.  It may come as a surprise that fruit bats 
also eat a lot of nectar.  Bats eat flowers from many different kinds of plants, from those with large 
flowers (such as gatae and futu), medium sized flowers (such as fa'i), to those with large numbers of 
smaller flowers (such as asi, maota, and a'amati'e).  The bats lick flowers using their long tongues, or 
sometimes take a shortcut and eat the entire flower. 
 
Fruit is the most common item in the diet of the 
Samoan Starling (fuia), Pacific Pigeon (lupe), Purple-
capped Fruit Dove (manutagi), and fruit bats (pe'a).  
Though all these animals share many of the same 
foods, each has its favorites.  Differences in what each 
species eats are partly caused by the different ways 
they feed and by their different sizes.  Since lupe and 
manutagi swallow fruits whole, this limits the size of 
fruit they can eat.  Manutagi seem to eat no fruits 
larger than moso'oi, but lupe are not as limited because 
they have really big mouths and can eat all but the 
largest fruits.  Although fuia are smaller than lupe, 
they have stronger bills. This allows them to pry open 
tough husks, and to poke into very large fruits like esi.  
Pe'a can eat the largest and hardest fruits because of 
their strong jaws and sharp teeth.  They have a very unique way of feeding:  they take a bite from a fruit, 
but don't really swallow it.  Instead, each bite is squeezed in the mouth, the pe'a swallows the juice and 
pulp, then flicks its head and spits out a flattened mass of leftover fruit called an 'ejecta'. 
 
The white-naped fruit bats (pe'a fanua) seem to especially like fruits from plantations such as mangos, 
and those from coastal trees such as fetau, although maybe they really like flowers best.  Samoan fruit 
bats (pe'a vao) generally prefer fruits found in the forest, both from non-native trees like ifi and native 
species such as a'amati'e, asi and gasu.  Both bats like figs, especially the green-fruited kind of aoa, and 
perhaps most of all, ulu (breadfruit).  But if you see bats in your ulu, you needn't worry that they are 
taking food from your mouth -- they like the overripe fruit that has been left on the tree so long that 
people wouldn't eat it anyway. 
 
Our most common Columbiformes (lupe and manutagi) all love the fruit of moso'oi.  It's funny to watch 
a little manutagi struggling to choke down a big moso'oi fruit -- but they get it down every time.  
Another large fruit favored by lupe (and sometimes eaten by manutagi) is the nutmeg (atone).  This is 
an interesting 'fruit', since what the birds eat is almost entirely 
indigestible seed -- the useful part is just a thin, brightly colored 
network (red or orange depending on the species of atone) that 
covers the seed.  This colored part is very fatty and is a good food 
for birds even if there is not much on each fruit.  Apparently this is a 
successful way to disperse seeds, since atone is the most common 
tree in the mature forests of Tutuila.  
 
Fruits preferred by manutagi include aoa, mati, the white berries of 
soga, and the seeds inside maota and mamala fruits.  Lupe eat many 
of the same fruits, but are able to eat a greater variety because they 
are a big bird.  They also eat the large fruits of mamalava, 
mamalupe, a'amati'e and ala'a.  Mamalupe literally means 'pigeon's 
mouthful':  one lupe once took a full 30 seconds to swallow a single 
mamalupe fruit! 
