 
 
NATURAL HISTORY GUIDE
 
 
78
if this is because the miti vao prefers such food or because the more aggressive fuia drives it away from 
softer, more nutritious fruit. 
   
Across most of Tutuila you may have some difficulty finding the miti vao.  
There are a few places where they seem to be more common:  Maloata on the 
west end of the island, between Afono and Vatia on the north side, and along 
the Mt. Alava Road.  Look for a small, short-tailed bird with a grayish back, a 
pale breast with darker streaking, and white eyes.  Its quiet but musical 
whistles and trills are very different from the harsh screeches and piercing 
whistles of the fuia.  Miti vao nests are placed in hollows and holes, as are fuia 
nests.  They usually lay two pale blue eggs with brown specklings.  So few 
nests have been found here that we really don't know what time of the year 
this species prefers to breed, or if they may nest at any time.  The miti vao is a 
species that apparently declined after tropical cyclones in 1990-91.  We can 
only hope that populations will increase over time, provided that enough good 
forest remains to give this species the wild habitat it needs. 
 
One interesting thing about the miti vao is that there is a very different form of this bird in Manu'a.  
There, the miti vao are very dark on both upperparts and underparts, with heavy dark streaking on the 
breast.  To become so different, the Manu'a birds must have been separated from those on Tutuila for a 
long time, probably thousands of years. 
 
Unfortunately, the native fuia and miti vao aren't Samoa's only starlings.  Since the 1980's, two other 
members of the starling family have invaded Tutuila, and are now among our commonest birds.  These 
are the black and white mynas that are common from Pago Pago Harbor to Leone.  Two species of 
mynas are established here, both of which were originally native to India.  The Common Myna is 
brownish black, with a yellow bill and a yellow patch of bare skin around the eye.  The Jungle Myna is 
similar, but is darker and slimmer, with an orange beak and no yellow skin around the eye.  Both species 
have large white patches in the wings and tail.  The Common Myna is a major pest in many parts of the 
Pacific, including New Zealand, Hawaii, Fiji, Cook Islands, and French Polynesia.  The Jungle Myna 
has become established only in Fiji and in the Samoan islands.  Both species eat almost anything and are 
very happy in cities and villages, where they eat garbage and nest under roofs even in occupied 
buildings.  These unwelcome invaders can damage guavas and other fruit crops, can spread disease, and  
may compete with our native birds in villages.  So far, the mynas have not yet spread to the Manu'a 
Islands.  It is important that we prevent their spread, and reserve American Samoa, as much as possible, 
for our native birds, including our native starlings, the fuia and the miti vao. 
 
 
Pepper Trail 
DMWR 
 
 
 
