 
 
NATURAL HISTORY GUIDE
 
 
60
of their droppings on the kitchen counter or floor.  At one point, their droppings in my house were so 
numerous, I collected them in plastic bags, with the idea that maybe I could market them as “South 
Pacific pollen” to some health food store in California. 
 
Ambrosia beetles.  These irritating little beetles appear in the early evening, fly 
towards the light, and crawl around on you like fleas in your hair.  If you don’t 
know what I’m talking about, you are one of the privileged people whom these 
beetles do not bother.  These wood-boring insects (Xyleborus sp.) are dark brown 
and 2.5 mm long.  They are called ambrosia beetles because they carry a fungus 
(the “ambrosia”) that they use to inoculate the tunnels that they drill into a tree. 
The fungus grows in the tunnels and provides food for their larvae. After mating, 
the female beetles emerge and go in search of another tree to lay their eggs in.  
 
 
Casebearer moth.  At some point you may notice these odd little insects dragging 
around their flat diamond-shaped cases.  These are the larvae of the small casebearer 
moth (Phereoeca sp.).  The larva is visible when it extends out of the case, but it 
retreats into the case when threatened or turns around and pops out the other end.  
They plod on, as if they really had someplace to go.  The larger cases are about 1-cm 
in length and are made out of silk fibers encrusted with debris such as sand particles, 
hair and insect parts.  The larva lives and grows in the case for about 2 months, feeding on things like 
old spider webs, wool fibers, etc.  After pupating, the larva develops into a tiny gray moth that measures 
about 5 mm from head to tip of wings.  A female moth lives only a week and lays about 200 eggs. 
 
Spiders (apogaleveleve).  We have a variety of web-spinning spiders in the 
house, as well as hunting spiders that don't make webs but actively search 
for their prey.  Some are quite big and may give you a fright, but none are 
known to cause us problems.  Hunting spiders include jumping spiders 
(which hunt in the daytime and are common in houses), wolf spiders (not 
often seen in houses), and large huntsman spiders that are big enough to 
prey on large cockroaches. 
 
Ants (loi).  Ants occur everywhere in American Samoa. You may not notice them 
very much until you leave some leftover sweets or other food lying around and come 
back later to find it crawling with ants transporting it piece by piece or drop by drop 
back to their nest.  One common species is the crazy ant, Paratrechina longicornis.  
They are black, about three millimeters long, and have long legs and antennae.  They 
seem to be running all the time, and it’s amazing how fast they can appear by the 
dozens around some spilled soda or juice.  When disturbed they run even faster, 
circling and zigzagging all over -- as if they really are crazy. 
 
Bug eaters: geckos (mo’o).   From the abundance of gecko 
droppings around the house, it’s apparent that the geckos 
hanging on the walls are eating lots of bugs.  Think of these 
droppings as little blessings in disguise. 
 
 
P.Craig, NPS 
Mark Schmaedick, ASCC Land Grant 
