NATURAL HISTORY GUIDE 
 
 
11
Samoa); and the Samoan fruit bat occurs only in the Samoan and Fijian islands.  So, our rainforest may 
lack diversity, but it contains some species found nowhere else on earth. 
 
Turning to our marine environment, we find the opposite situation.  There is an incredibly diverse 
ecosystem just beneath the waves.  Coral reefs are among the most species-rich ecosystems in the world.  
We have, for example, 890 nearshore fish species which is an amazingly high number compared to 
many other coastal areas.  To get a sense of this species-rich environment, if you were to dive on our 
reefs once a week, you could in theory see a new fish species on every dive for 17 years. 
 
Although coral reefs are limited to shallow waters, usually around the fringes of islands, most coral reef 
species have eggs and larvae that can survive for weeks or months in the open ocean and get dispersed 
by ocean currents to new locations.  As a result of this genetic exchange of marine organisms between 
islands, there are probably few marine species that are unique to the Samoan islands. 
 
Finally, superimposed over the South Pacific region is a larger-scale pattern of species distributions. 
Most of our marine and land species can be traced back to the same or related species inhabiting 
mainland and insular southeast Asia.  From that center of remarkably high diversity, rainforest and coral 
reef species radiated out, spreading eastward across the South Pacific islands.  But like ripples in a pond, 
the farther away one gets from that 'center', the fewer the species (see map below).  This same pattern 
applies to corals, fishes, sea turtles, seagrasses, mangroves, land birds and plants.  Very few species 
reached here from the opposite direction (South America) probably due to the much greater distance and 
fewer islands in that direction to facilitate 'island hopping'. 
 
P.Craig, NPS  
 
 
Contours represent the number of tropical fish species (reef, inshore and epipelagic species). 
 
        
