 
 
NATURAL HISTORY GUIDE
 
 
79
41.  Swiftlets & sheath-tailed bats (o le pe'ape'a):  a mosquito's nightmare 
 
 
High above the villages, valleys, and mountains of Samoa 
flies a deadly predator, as terrifying as a tiger shark -- if you're 
a mosquito (namu), that is.   This is the pe'ape'a, the only bird 
in Samoa that lives entirely on a diet of insects. 
 
But wait a minute -- pe'a means bat:  isn't the pe'ape'a a kind 
of small bat?  Well, yes and no.  Actually two completely 
different creatures share the name pe'ape'a in Samoa.  One is 
a bird, the common White-rumped Swiftlet that is seen flying 
by day all over our islands.  Like all birds, this pe'ape'a has 
feathers and lays eggs.  The other pe'ape'a, more properly 
called pe'ape'avai, is a tiny bat, the Sheath-tailed Bat that is active only at night.  This animal is now almost 
extinct in American Samoa.  Like all bats, this pe'ape'a is a mammal and has fur and gives birth to live 
young that it feeds milk.  The confusion arises because both creatures are tiny, active insect-eaters that are 
almost always in flight, and look similar as they dart and swoop after their prey. 
 
First let's talk about the common pe'ape'a:  the bird.  It belongs to 
a family of birds that are truly creatures of the air, the swifts.  
They have tiny legs and feet, and never land except at nests or in 
their roosting caves.  Capturing and eating food, drinking, 
gathering nesting material, and yes, even mating, are all done in 
flight.  In fact, it is likely that the pe'ape'a is like many other 
kinds of swifts and actually sleeps while flying.  With their long, 
powerful wings and perfectly streamlined bodies, pe'ape'a are 
beautifully adapted for a life of flight. 
 
As they fly, pe'ape'a are continually hunting for small insects, 
especially mosquitoes, flies, and flying ants and termites.  These are 
scooped up in the swift's huge mouth, which is made into an even 
larger trap by long bristle-like feathers around the mouth.  The 
swiftlet is a very useful bird because of all the insects it eats. 
 
When the pe'ape'a finally does decide that it's time to land, it heads for a cave or a protected overhang on a 
cliff.  There it flutters in to grasp the rock, usually hanging vertically.  These caves and sheltered overhangs 
are also the nest site for the swifts.  The nest is a small platform made of moss and fine twigs cemented 
together with the bird's saliva, attached to the rock.  Some close relatives of the pe'ape'a make their nests 
entirely from dried saliva, which (believe it or not) are collected and cooked up to make that famous 
delicacy, bird's nest soup.  The nests of our pe'ape'a are not suitable for this, so anyone with a taste for bird 
saliva will have to look elsewhere. 
 
Swiftlets lay one or two white eggs, and appear to nest at any time of year in Samoa.  Although most nests 
are placed where at least a little light penetrates the cave, some are far back, where it is completely dark.  
How do the swifts find their way in and out?  The answer is that these birds, like many small bats, have the 
amazing ability to echo-locate.  They give loud clicking calls, and then listen to the echoes to orient 
themselves and avoid the walls of the cave.  This ability is fairly undeveloped in birds, and the swiftlets 
don't use it to locate their insect prey, which is why they hunt during the daytime.  In many small bats, 
however, echo-location is incredibly advanced, and is used to hunt tiny insects in complete darkness.  One 
bat with this ability is the Sheath-tailed Bat, which brings us to our second pe'ape'a. 
