 
 
NATURAL HISTORY GUIDE
 
 
90
 
The tava'e has a close relative, the Red-tailed Tropicbird, or tava'e'ula, that nests on Rose Atoll.  This bird 
is larger and heavier than the tava'e, with shining pinkish-white feathers and red tail plumes.  It typically 
nests on the ground among rocks, roots, or logs.  In former times, this bird apparently nested on Tutuila, 
but it no longer does so.  The reason may be the abundance of introduced animals such as rats, cats, and 
dogs that attack ground-nesting birds on Tutuila. 
 
Our next seabird, the manu sina or manusina (also called 
the white tern or common fairy tern) is perhaps Samoa's 
most familiar bird.  At almost any time of day you can lift 
your eyes to the mountains and see these pure white birds 
circling effortlessly over the green forest.  I recommend 
contemplation of this lovely sight to anyone feeling 
burned out by the noise and ugliness that sometimes 
surround us at eye level.  It's always a nice reminder of 
the beauty of the natural Samoan environment. 
 
The manu sina is found throughout the tropical oceans of 
the world and seems able to adapt to human-altered 
landscapes better than do many seabirds.  Those of you familiar with Honolulu may have noticed manu 
sina fluttering in the trees along Kalakaua Avenue, where they actually nest in the middle of Waikiki. 
 
The nesting behavior of manu sina is remarkable indeed.  In fact, “nesting” is being a bit generous, since 
manu sina make no nest at all.  Instead, they balance their large single egg in a knothole, stub, or other 
more or less precarious perch in a tree.  They will even accept man-made structures like rooftops and 
ledges.  It is amazing to see a manu sina stubbornly sitting on its egg as a strong tropical storm swings its 
branch wildly.  Risky though is seems to us, this nesting strategy certainly works, as the White Tern is a 
common and widespread bird. 
 
Manu sina feed on a variety of small ocean fish, which they pluck from the surface.  Unlike all the other 
seabirds of Samoa, the manu sina carries fish back to its chick in its beak, rather than swallowing them 
first.  In fact, they have the incredible ability to capture several tiny fish in a row, shift them crosswise in 
their bill, and carry them back home, without dropping a one.  How do they do it? 
 
The final seabird to be discussed is the gogo, or Brown 
Noddy.  Like the manu sina, this bird is a member of 
the tern family, but these two cousins are different in 
many ways.  For starters, the gogo is as dark as the 
manu sina is light.  It is dark chocolate brown all over, 
except for the top of the head, which is a whitish-gray 
cap.  It is also more sociable than the manu sina, 
usually nesting in loose groups, or colonies.  The gogo 
is very flexible in its nesting behavior.  On Tutuila, 
gogo usually nest high in trees in forested stream 
valleys, building bulky nests of dead leaves and other plant material.  They also sometimes nest on cliffs, 
for example at Fagatele Bay.  On Rose Island and other atolls, gogo are happy to lay their eggs on the 
ground, making only a small scrape in the coral rubble, which they often decorate with empty seashells 
and even bones.  Like other tropical seabirds, the gogo typically lays only a single egg. 
 
There is another gogo here, the Black Noddy, which is smaller and blacker than the Brown Noddy, and 
has a different way of flying.  In good light they are separated from Brown Noddies that have a distinct 
