 
 
NATURAL HISTORY GUIDE
 
 
92
48.  The special birds of Manu'a 
 
 
The Manu'a Islands are famous for their history, culture, and spectacular beauty, but the wildlife of Ta'u, 
Ofu, and Olosega is also special.   Given that these islands are only 60 miles east of Tutuila, you might 
expect that the same kinds of birds and animals would be found in both places.  But in fact there are four 
kinds of birds living in Manu'a that do not occur on Tutuila.   
 
The most beautiful of these is Samoa's only parrot, the segavao, or Blue-
crowned Lory.  This is a tiny jewel of a bird, only 7 inches long, but colored 
with emerald green back and wings, ruby red face and throat, and a sapphire 
blue crown.  In historic times, these colorful feathers were used to decorate 
finemats. 
 
Segavao often come in to villages to feed on the nectar of coconut (niu) and 
coral tree (gatae) flowers, but they are not easy to see in spite of their bright 
colors.  Your first clue to their presence is often their high-pitched whistles, 
given as they fly overhead or scramble in the top of a coconut tree.  This 
pretty little parrot is also found in western Samoa, but does not live on 
Tutuila.  We don't know why.  Tutuila seems to have some of the food 
segavao like, including aoa fruits, but perhaps there are not enough flowers 
all year round.  In the forests of Manu'a, segavao particularly like the flowers 
of Astronidium pickeringii, a species for which we know no Samoan name.  
This tree of the melastome family is common in the high forests of Manu'a. 
 
Another special bird of Manu'a is the sega o le vau, the Lesser  (Fiji) 
Shrikebill.  This is a charcoal-grey bird with tiny white corners on its 
tail, although if you get a very good look you might see a little brown 
along its sides, or its blue-grey legs.  Sega o le vau are about the same 
size as iao, but are stockier and have bigger heads and wider beaks.  
This bird is found nowhere else in the Samoan islands. It also occurs in 
Fiji, but birds there look very different and are mostly brown.  Sega o 
le vau can be seen on all three islands of Manu'a, but they are not 
closely tied to a particular habitat.  They are usually heard before they 
are seen, as they often make a loud chatter as they poke through dead 
vines or ie'ie leaves.  They also make a clear two-toned whistle, and 
may answer if you imitate this call.  These birds seem sociable and often move through the forest in 
small groups of two or three.  They often ignore people, and if you sit very still they will sometimes 
feed within arms reach.  
 
The Spotless Crake is a small black bird that looks like a half-grown Banded 
Rail (ve'a).  It is extremely rare and has only been found in American Samoa 
on Ta'u Island.  It lives in dense grass, is active mostly at dawn and dusk, and 
is very shy.  All these habits makes it very hard to see, and only a few birds 
have been sighted in recent years. 
 
Another rare land bird in American Samoa is the tuaimeo, the Friendly 
Ground-Dove.  This bird gets its name because it was first discovered in 
Tonga, once called the Friendly Islands.  A better name would probably be the Shy Ground-Dove, as 
this bird will sit very still on a low branch and hope you do not notice it.  Your best chance of seeing 
one is if it happens to be walking in the path you are using, as it may run ahead of you or fly up onto a 
