 
 
NATURAL HISTORY GUIDE
 
 
17
You might wonder, how is it that non-tropical oceans are much more productive?  The answer is, again, 
temperature.  Away from the tropics, seasonal changes in water temperature cause the water to mix.  
Winter temperatures cool the upper layer causing it to sink and mix with the bottom layer, and when this 
occurs, some nutrients are brought up to the surface.  The nutrients in shallow sunlit waters stimulate 
phytoplankton growth, thus fueling a more productive foodweb. 
 
In the tropics, the 2-layer stratification of the ocean persists year-round because hot sun keeps the 
surface layer warm.  The tropical ocean has been called a 'biological desert' for this reason.  That's an 
exaggeration, of course, because all the tuna out there are finding something to eat.  And, many other 
species live out there as well, from an occasional whale, dolphin, sea turtle or seabird, to numerous 
species of fish and invertebrates such as jellyfish and shrimp-like crustaceans. 
 
 
 
              Marlin (sa'ula) 
       Mahimahi (masimasi) 
               Tuna (atu) 
 
What are some of the marine resources in our offshore waters?  Three ocean resources of potential 
interest to American Samoa are fish, minerals and the water itself.  Several kinds of food and sport fish 
are present in modest numbers: tuna, masimasi, marlin, wahoo, sharks, and flying fish.  Surveys 
indicate, however, that the abundance of oceanic fishes within our 200-mile limit is probably not high 
enough to warrant significant commercial development of offshore fisheries.  That's the main reason 
why the big tuna boats that deliver to American Samoa's 
canneries travel far beyond our 200-mile zone to other 
locations where the tuna are more abundant (the canneries are 
located here only to gain duty-free access to US markets).   
 
Another resource mentioned from time to time are mineral 
deposits, such as manganese nodules, that lie on the seafloor.  
However, these nodules, even if present in our waters, are too 
deep for economic extraction by current technologies. 
 
Perhaps a more exploitable resource in the future involves the 
temperature of the ocean's cold bottom layer.  Scientists are 
working on a technology that extracts energy (to produce 
electricity) through a heat-exchange mechanism that is made 
possible by the large temperature difference between the 
tropical ocean's warm surface and cold bottom layers.  A 
demonstration facility for this technology has been operating 
in Hawaii since the 1970's, but it has been an uneconomical 
venture so far.  The two requirements for this technology -- a 
large temperature differential in the ocean, and easy access to 
this temperature difference by land-based facilities -- are met 
in American Samoa.  Will our future electricity needs be 
powered by our own blue ocean? 
 
P.Craig, NPS 
