 
 
NATURAL HISTORY GUIDE
 
 
68
the disease from plant to plant.  Perhaps these aphids are less effective 
virus carriers or they are not very abundant here.  Banana plants infected 
with the virus produce small, narrow leaves with yellow, tattered edges 
bunched together, thus the name “bunchy top”.  When one plant becomes 
infected, the virus spreads to the rest of the plants growing from the same 
“root” mat.  Infected plants stop producing bananas and become shorter 
and shorter until the plant finally dies.  During this time, any aphid feeding 
on an infected plant can carry the virus to an uninfected banana plant.  
Another way the disease is spread is by removing suckers from an infected 
root mat and planting them elsewhere.  There is some concern in American Samoa that the disease could 
begin to spread more widely, but there is a safe way to control bunchy top with a small application of a 
common herbicide [contact Land Grant for details]. 
 
Burrowing nematode (nematota).  This pest attacks the roots of banana plants.  Nematodes are small, 
worm-like residents of soil and water.  Most of them feed on dead plants and other tiny organisms, but 
some attack the roots of living plants.  The burrowing nematode (Radopholus similis) enters young 
banana roots and eats the insides.  When large numbers of nematodes feed on a plant, the roots are so 
damaged that the plant can fall over.  This is one reason why banana plants topple over during strong 
winds or rain, or when they bear a heavy bunch of fruit.  Damaged banana plants usually produce fewer 
and smaller fruits than healthy plants.  Banana varieties grown in American Samoa have no resistance to 
this pest.  The best way to control the nematodes is to remove their source of food (the banana root mat) 
for one year or flood the land, making it unsuitable for the nematode. 
 
Rhinoceros beetle (manuainiu).  These giant beetles cause a 
distinctive diamond-shaped pattern cut out of coconut leaves 
(fronds).  The adult beetle burrows into the tops of coconut 
trees, then down toward their center.  As it burrows, it cuts 
through the new, unopened leaves, so when the leaves open 
later, large wedges of the leaves are missing.  If the midrib is 
cut, the leaf may break on windy days.  While this may 
weaken some leaves and make them look unsightly, we don’t 
know if the damage is serious enough to reduce the number 
of coconuts produced by the tree. 
 
The adult beetle (Oryctes rhinoceros) is amazingly large -- almost two inches long -- black and shiny, 
with a horn on its head, like a rhinoceros.  Although it's hard to visualize, the horn apparently helps 
them feed by stabilizing the beetle while it moves its jaws up and down, scraping a hole in the tree.  The 
beetles do not eat the wood but live on sap from the damaged plant cells.  The 
female lays one egg on the ground, usually in dead coconut trees, logs, piles of 
compost or debris.  The young larvae are white with a brown  
head.  They grow almost four inches  
long before they pupate and become  
adult beetles.   
 
 
 
Fred Brooks 
ASCC Land Grant                                          
 
                                                                                                                                                                
Rhinoceros beetle
Larva
