 
 
NATURAL HISTORY GUIDE
 
 
58
30. Four interesting insects:  afato, se, alisi, lelefue 
 
 
Insects are an impressive group.  They are extremely abundant and highly diverse (over 800,000 species 
worldwide), they inhabit almost every terrestrial and aquatic habitat imaginable, and they have been on 
earth long before the dinosaurs ever roamed.  Over 2,500 species have been recorded in the Samoan 
Archipelago, with many more yet to be documented.  Four large but somewhat secretive insects are 
featured here: 
Giant longhorn beetle.  These beetles are unusual for two 
reasons:  they grow very large and people eat them.  The adult 
beetle pictured here was almost 3 inches long from head to tail.  
What does it eat with those large powerful jaws?  It lays its eggs 
in standing dead trees (particularly mamalava, tufaso, tavai) and 
after hatching, the larvae feed on the surrounding wood.  These 
larvae (afato) grow very large and are collected and eaten in 
Samoa, Fiji and probably throughout the South Pacific.  Two 
villages in Savai’i are particularly well known for harvesting 
many afato:  Gataivai and Aopo.  Afato are fed coconut 
shavings, and then they are often eaten with coconut cream, and 
they taste like …. coconut.  But here in American Samoa, times 
are changing – one person said he had eaten afato in the past 
                                                                but now he prefers to eat a Big Mac.  
 
Walking stick (se).  These large green or brown insects 
can grow up to 5 inches long.  They usually remain 
motionless and look like a branch or small twig, hoping 
that this camouflage will spare them from being eaten by 
a hungry Samoan starling (fuia).  These slow-moving 
‘sticks’ feed on leaves, most notably coconut fronds.  
Some can fly, although not very gracefully -- if one lands 
on a person, a local belief is that it is a messenger announcing that someone will be coming to visit you. 
 
Katydid (alisi).  Here’s the insect that makes all that noise at dusk.  As the sun 
sets, katydids start the evening with a loud screechy chorus that lasts about 20 
minutes.  After a little warm-up noise, they synchronize with their neighbors so 
that all of them are screech screeching in unison.  These are male katydids 
trying to attract females.  The sound is produced as they rub special structures 
on their front wings, back and forth.  Katydids are green, about 1.5 inches long, 
and look like a leaf.  Just like the walking sticks, katydids hope their 
camouflage make them difficult to see.  Katydids are related to crickets and 
grasshoppers and are sometimes called long-horned grasshoppers. 
 
Hummingbird moth (lelefua).  At dusk you might be surprised to see 
what looks like a hummingbird hovering in front of a flower, 
sipping its nectar.  This is actually a thick-bodied moth with an 
extremely rapid wing beat and a long proboscis that it sticks down 
the flower tubes.  This is a good example of convergent evolution, 
where two very different kinds of organisms (a bird and a moth) 
evolved a similar way to extract nectar out of long, delicate flowers.  
The moth is also known as the hawk or sphinx moth. 
P.Craig, NPS 
