 
 
NATURAL HISTORY GUIDE
 
 
49
Nectar feeders and fruit eaters don't just use their food plants -- they can help them as well by fertilizing 
their flowers.  This happens when pollen from one flower sticks to a bird's feathers or the fur of a pe'a, 
and then rubs off when the animal visits another flower.  Fruit eaters also help plants.  Most of the time 
this happens when they eat the fruit but don't completely digest the seeds; when the animal defecates, 
the seeds may have been moved far from the parent tree where they have a better chance to grow.  Many 
plants actually count on animals eating their fruits, and so they coat their seeds with a substance that 
makes them hard to digest.  In this way, immobile trees accomplish their most difficult task -- dispersing 
(spreading) their seeds.  When a tree species has no seed dispersers, its spread to new areas will be 
limited, it can become restricted to only a few places, and it is vulnerable to extinction from cyclones, 
diseases, or cutting by people.  A good example of such a tree is ifilele, which tends to occur in only a 
few areas on the north side of Tutuila.  
 
Probably the most important disperser of fruits in American Samoa 
is the fuia, since it eats a very wide variety of fruits.  It is 
particularly important in regenerating (converting back to forest) 
areas that have been cleared for plantations or by cyclones.  You can 
see this by noting how quickly a cleared area will become covered 
with lau pata, maota, and masame, or how nonu or pualulu begin 
sprouting in a clearing deep in the forest.  Once an area has these 
initial forest tree species, the area becomes more suitable for tree 
species that prefer mature forests, like mamalava or asi. 
 
You can play an important role in helping the wildlife on our islands 
by helping our native trees.  First, avoid cutting down or burning 
native trees, especially slower growing species such as au'auli or 
important coastal species such as fetau.  Other trees are so rare or important that they simply should 
never be cut, including aoa, tava, and togo.  Some plantations illustrate a good compromise between the 
needs of people and the needs of the forest.  As the plantation is cleared, smaller, fast growing trees like 
lau pata or atone are cut, but larger trees are avoided, or only their limbs are pruned (cut off).  In this 
way crops like talo (taro) get the sunlight they need, but it does not kill large trees that are adapted to 
recovering from cyclone damage.  Such trees may resprout leaves and branches, probably about the time 
a farmer is done harvesting the crops from the plantation. 
 
Second, help native trees by planting them.  You can request seedlings of native species from the Land 
Grant at the Community College.  Always plant native trees instead of exotic (foreign) trees unless 
needed for their fruit.  For example, aoa should be planted instead of pulu trees.  Flame trees, vaepovi 
and African tulip trees may look attractive to people, but these trees benefit fewer wildlife species than 
our own native trees.  For areas such as lawns where large trees are not wanted, tree ferns (olioli) are an 
attractive native option, while the various kinds of mati are good choices for wildlife.  In places where 
too much shade is undesirable, filimoto is a good choice.  
Joshua Seamon, Pepper Trail 
                                                                                                                                                       DWMR 
[Some Samoan plant  
names are listed  
in the appendix.] 
