 
 
NATURAL HISTORY GUIDE
 
 
18
7.  What is coral?   
 
 
The islands of American Samoa are blessed with 
an abundance of coral (about 200 species), so 
this article presents an introduction to these 
unusual organisms. 
 
Corals are animals like ourselves, although that 
may not be readily apparent because many look 
like whitish rocks, especially those washed up on 
the beach.  In a sense, corals are indeed partly 
rock, because only the outer thin layer of the 
coral is inhabited by the coral animal itself.  In 
that way, corals are like large trees – the inner 
part is hard and provides structural support, the 
outer part is the living, growing organism.  And, 
like trees, most coral animals are permanently 
attached to one spot on the reef. 
                                                                                              
The coral rubble that Samoans traditionally spread outside their houses, and the coral rocks along our 
beaches, are old, dead pieces that broke off the reef during a storm, got tumbled around and tossed up on 
the beach. 
 
Living corals grow primarily on the outer reef flat and in deeper water.  Although they take varied 
shapes, the coral animals inhabiting their surfaces are similar.  They look somewhat like miniature sea 
anemones (matamalu, ulumane) or upside-down jellyfish (alualu) with short tentacles that give the coral 
a slightly fuzzy appearance when the tentacles are extended.  Each single coral animal is called a polyp, 
but the coral branch or block we see on the reef is actually not a single animal but a colony of hundreds 
or thousands of tiny polyps living side by side, giving the appearance of being a single “coral”.  The 
coral's short tentacles can be pulled back into the hard part of the coral when the animal is disturbed  
or when the coral is exposed at low tide, so even a live coral can look like a rock at such times. 
 
 
 
 
In the coral shown at left, a single polyp lives in each hole, but all the polyps have withdrawn  
into their skeleton (the polyps of many coral species emerge only at night).  In the coral at right,  
many fuzzy-looking polyps have emerged to feed.  
 
It seems inconceivable that these tiny coral polyps can build the hard coral ‘rocks’ that we see on the 
reef.  They do this by secreting layers of a hard substance (calcium carbonate) beneath their living cells.    
Seven general kinds of coral growth forms. 
