 
 
NATURAL HISTORY GUIDE
 
 
43
(much like a graying man).  Its neck and shoulder areas are a beautiful russet brown, while the rest of 
the body has a dusty black appearance.  The pe'a fanua, on the other hand, has a basically black head 
and body.  These black areas serve to set off a distinctive band of creamy yellow on the back of the neck 
and which extends slightly below its shoulders as if in a cape.  This explains why they are called white-
naped fruit bats although the color is not really white. 
 
The two species have quite different social behaviors.  During the daytime, pe'a fanua form large 
roosting groups or colonies of hundreds to thousands of bats.  These colonies are generally organized 
according to their reproductive status and may be composed of bachelor males, clusters of females 
defended by an adult male (suggesting a harem mating system), or groups of females and their young.  
In any case, individuals appear to be relatively “faithful” to their roosts, usually returning to their 
respective colonies following foraging flights.   
 
But the pe'a vao does not do this.  Instead, these bats 
usually roost singly on branches, or as pairs of males 
and females (suggesting a monogamous mating 
system), or as a female with its young.  When 
roosting, pe'a vao males tend to hang from exposed 
or dead branches of trees on ridge tops while females 
roost in more covered positions on forest slopes.  
 
There is little information on how long flying foxes 
live, although some held in captivity have lived 20 
years.  We assume that they live shorter lives in the 
wild, because natural catastrophes like tropical 
cyclones may periodically reduce their numbers, as 
occurred in the early 1990s.  With proper 
management and protection from hunting, the 
populations will generally bounce back but this requires a number of years, because females of both 
species probably have only one young per year and we do not know how many of their young survive to 
adulthood. 
 
The care and energy that both bat species put into their young is remarkable.  Pregnancy lasts 
approximately 5 months in both species, and once the young are born, it takes at least another 3 months 
before they are weaned.  Even after they are capable of flight, the young continue to receive parental 
care, perhaps until they reach adult size or become reproductively active themselves.  We know this 
from observations of pairs of individuals seen to alight independently on the same tree and subsequently 
come together with one individual (presumably the juvenile) being wrapped up in the other's wings as 
they settle down to roost.  Sightings of pregnant females and individuals carrying young in flight 
indicate that pe'a vao give birth mostly between April and June.  Pe'a fanua births appear to occur year-
round but are more common in January and June to August. 
 
Although their name indicates that they are fruit-eaters, both species also eat nectar, pollen, leaves, and 
sap.  They tend to consume only the “juice” of fruits and leaves.  To do this, a bat will carefully chew on 
food (usually eating around large seeds), press the pulp against the roof of its mouth with its tongue, 
squeeze and suck in the juice, then spit out most of the pulp in pellets called “ejecta.”  These ejecta are 
especially abundant under breadfruit trees (ulu) where the bats have been feeding overnight.  Among the 
splatter of mushy bits of the fruit, you can find these pellets of drier material that sometimes show tooth 
and palatal (roof of the mouth) impressions, much like a dental cast produced at a dentist’s clinic.  
Ejecta pellets help us to identify food items that bats eat even when we do not directly observe them 
feeding.  In addition to direct observations and analysis of ejecta, their diets are also determined through 
