 
 
NATURAL HISTORY GUIDE
 
 
75
39.  The honey-birds 
 
 
The most familiar birds of Tutuila's villages and gardens are the iao (Wattled Honeyeater) and the 
segasegamau'u (Cardinal Honeyeater).  Although they look different, these birds are members of the 
same aiga, the family of birds called the honeyeaters.  Honeyeaters are found throughout the Pacific 
islands, New Guinea, and Australia.  As their name implies, most of them include the sweet nectar of 
flowers in their diet (though none of them eat real honey).  
 
 
The iao or Wattled Honeyeater (Foulehaio carunculata) is the 
commonest forest bird in Samoa.  It is also found in Tonga and 
Fiji.  Although not a particularly beautiful bird, with its greenish-
brown feathers and yellow flaps of bare skin on the face, its 
boundless energy and continuous song enliven our islands.  Its 
bold and fearless nature keeps it busy chasing other birds, and its 
loud alarm calls warn other animals of the lulu (Barn Owl) or 
other danger.  Samoan legend tells that when the iao calls at night, 
it means that ghosts (aitu) are near.   
 
The iao feeds at almost all the flowers of the forest, from small 
atone (nutmeg) flowers to the large crimson blooms of gatae 
(coral tree).  Christmastime is the best time of year for iao, 
because the asi trees are in full bloom.  These white brushy flowers cover the tree crowns and are rich 
with nectar.  At that time, the iao get so full of this nectar that they're like kids full of candy and cake at 
a party -- they rush every which way through the forest, chasing each other and yelling out songs at the 
top of their lungs.  At other times when flowers aren't quite so abundant, they eat a lot of insects as well, 
and also include some soft fruits and berries in their diet. 
 
Even though the iao is our commonest bird, we really don't know very much about its habits.  Their 
nests are beautifully woven cups of grass, typically well-hidden in the dense foliage of a tree.  Usually 
only one or two eggs are laid.  Most nesting appears to take place between September and December. 
 
The segasegamau'u or Cardinal Honeyeater 
(Myzomela cardinalis) is the prettiest bird of 
Samoa's gardens.  Unlike most Samoan birds, 
the male and female Cardinal Honeyeater look 
very different:  the male is bright red, with 
black wings and tail, while the female is a dull 
gray, with a little bit of red on the rump.  These 
tiny birds (the smallest in American Samoa) 
always seem to be active, flitting among the 
aute (ornamental hibiscus), teuila (ginger), and 
nonu (Indian mulberry) in our gardens, or 
sampling nectar at flowers high in the forest 
treetops.  Like the iao, the segasegamau'u is 
very vocal, though not as loud as its larger 
cousin.  Its sweet warbling songs are familiar 
sounds in our villages and plantations. 
 
The segasegamau'u is even more of a honey-bird than the iao.  Though it will occasionally eat small 
insects, it seems very dependent on flower nectar at all times of year.  You can see the difference in the 
