 
 
NATURAL HISTORY GUIDE
 
 
87
46.  Shorebirds (o tuli):  incredible voyagers 
 
 
April/May is the time of year when some familiar visitors leave American Samoa and begin an 
incredible and perilous journey home.  These visitors are the shorebirds, or tuli.  Three different kinds of 
tuli are common visitors here between the months of September and April:  the Pacific Golden Plover, 
the Wandering Tattler, and the Ruddy Turnstone. 
 
During the northern summer, all three tuli nest in Alaska and 
northern Canada.  The plover and the turnstone nest in the tundra, 
where their neighbors are caribou and grizzly bears.  The tattlers 
nest by icy mountain streams, sharing their world with mountain 
sheep and golden eagles.  But when the northern days grow 
shorter and colder, the birds probably begin to dream of the 
beaches and reefs of Polynesia, for they set out on one of the 
greatest of all animal journeys.  From gathering places on the 
coasts of Alaska, the tuli take off to fly non-stop over 3,000 miles 
of open ocean to the Hawaiian Islands.  These birds cannot land 
on the water and take a rest -- their feathers are not waterproof, so 
if they land in the water, they drown.  Not only is this flight an 
amazing physical feat, but it requires tremendous navigational 
abilities to find tiny specks of land lost in the featureless sea.  
After a well-earned rest in Hawaii, the tuli take off again for 
another flight over thousands of miles of ocean to reach Samoa. 
 
Here, each kind of tuli takes up a slightly different lifestyle.  
The Golden Plover is often seen on the beaches, but even more 
commonly can be found searching for food on the short grass of 
malae, parks, the golf course, and the airport.  We can only hope 
it will not be harmed from competing with the many myna birds 
that now occupy these areas.   
 
Although this plover is plain brown during most of its stay in 
American Samoa, it gets a beautiful new set of feathers just 
before it heads north:  a golden-spangled back and jet black 
underparts.  The plover is the commonest tuli in Samoa, and it 
features in many myths and legends.  Tuli the Messenger is one 
manifestation of Tagaloa, the supreme god of the ancient 
Samoans, and in one version of the Samoan creation story, 
Tagaloa created the first dry land as a resting place for tuli. 
 
The Wandering Tattler is a beachcomber.  It is almost always seen on beaches or the reef, using its long 
beak to pry small crabs, worms, and other delicacies out of the sand or coral.  It is a solitary bird, 
soberly dressed in gray.  When disturbed, the tattler's loud cries explain how it got its name. 
 
The turnstone was named for its way of feeding.  These small, energetic, sociable birds like to 
vigorously flip over small stones, bits of seaweed, or debris in search of food hiding beneath.  They can 
be seen either on the beach or in grassy areas.  The turnstone has a beautiful pattern of black and white 
patches on its back when it flies, and in breeding plumage, it is a handsome bird with orange-brown, 
black, and white patterning.   
 
