NATURAL HISTORY GUIDE 
 
 
12
4. This volcano we live on 
 
 
The geology of the Samoan islands is surprisingly interesting.  First, we are living on a volcano, which 
is resting quietly at the moment.  Second, our volcano is on the move -- it's traveling towards China with 
us on it.  And, finally and most unfortunately, our volcano is doomed and it will eventually sink back 
into the dark ocean depths. 
 
About 1.3 million years ago, our volcano spewed forth enough lava to rise up out of the ocean and 
become “Tutuila Island”.  Actually, just the tip of the volcano is visible to us -- most of the mountain is 
underwater.  While the tallest mountain peak on Tutuila is about one half mile high, the mountain 
extends another 2 miles below the sea surface. 
 
It is not really an exaggeration to call the Samoan islands 'active volcanoes'.  These islands were indeed 
formed by volcanism, and the volcanoes are still active, in a geologic timeframe of course, and due to 
some unusual circumstances as described below. 
 
The most recent volcanic eruptions were a lot more recent than many people realize.  In western Samoa, 
major eruptions occurred in 1905 when lava flows destroyed a village.  In the Manu'a islands, 
subsurface volcanic eruptions and earthquakes occurred in 1866, causing dense clouds of smoke and 
pumice to erupt from the ocean surface for several months.  One hundred years ago is just a blink of the 
eye to a volcano, which measures time in the millions of years.  We humans tend to forget how briefly 
people have lived upon these shores. Human habitation on Tutuila, even considering the whole 3000-
year period that Samoans have dwelt here, represents a mere 0.2% of the time since the sun first shone 
on this new land. 
 
To explain our volcano's slow-motion march towards China, we first need to review the nature of the 
earth's surface or crust.  The earth's outer layer, the one we live on, is several miles thick, but that is a 
thin skin compared to the total size of the earth.  This outer layer is made up of many separate sections 
that seemingly float on top of the earth's molten core and move about in very slow motion.  Geologists 
call these outer sections “plates”.  You may recall, for example, that the continents of Africa and South 
America were once joined together when the earth first formed, but the two continents slowly drifted 
apart to where they are today.  The same process applies to the plates under the Pacific Ocean.  The 
plate we're on is called the Pacific Plate and it is moving westward (towards China) at a leisurely speed 
of about 3 inches per year.  At this rate, in one million years we will be 50 miles closer to China. 
 
It is not accidental that the islands of American Samoa and 
western Samoa lie roughly in a straight line.  Directly 
underneath us is what geologists call a “hot spot” of thermal 
activity in the earth's core.  It's a volcano just waiting to 
happen.  When the pressure builds up at the hot spot, molten 
magma bursts up through the Pacific Plate and forms a 
volcanic island.  Then the hot spot calms down for awhile, 
perhaps a million years or so.  During this peaceful interval, 
the Pacific Plate keeps marching onward, so when the hot 
spot acts up again, it forms a new volcanic island rather than 
build upon the previous one.  In other words, the hot spot 
stays in one place but the plate above it keeps moving. 
 
The islands formed generally lie in a straight line that is oriented in the direction the plate is moving.  
The new islands form on the eastern end of the chain, so the islands become progressively older as you 
