 
 
NATURAL HISTORY GUIDE
 
 
42
22.  Flying Foxes (fruit bats) 
 
 
Large flying foxes, also know as fruit bats, are one of the more unusual 
animals in American Samoa, especially for visitors from areas where 
bats are small and rarely seen.  Three species inhabit our islands – two 
large fruit bats (Pteropus samoensis, P. tonganus) and a small insect-
eating bat (Emballonura semicaudata).  These three are the only native 
mammals in the Samoan islands.   
 
The two flying foxes are especially distinctive:  they are renowned for being large (with a wing span up 
to 3 feet wide) and active both day and night.  Pteropus samoensis (pe'a vao) is commonly called the 
Samoan flying fox.  It is presently found only in the Samoan Archipelago and Fiji.  It once occurred in 
Tonga but is now extinct there.  The other flying fox, Pteropus tonganus (pe'a fanua), has several 
common names such as the Insular, White-naped, White-necked or Tongan fruit bat.  It has a wider 
distribution in the Pacific, ranging from islands off Papua New Guinea to the Cook Islands. 
 
In American Samoa, flying foxes can be seen flying, soaring, feeding, or just hanging in trees.  
Although individuals of the two species overlap in size (adults weigh 300-600 grams), there are ways to 
differentiate them from a distance.  When silhouetted against the sky, the pe'a vao has a more triangular 
shape, with wings that are slightly scalloped and relatively dark and opaque.  Their flight appears more 
relaxed, usually with slower wing beats and deeper wing strokes.  It is not unusual to observe them 
soaring in the air in the day, taking advantage of rising currents of warm air (thermals) to seemingly 
float up and about without flapping their wings. 
 
In contrast, pe'a fanua has a more cross-like appearance:  the neck and head appear more pronounced, 
the wings are narrower and more scalloped, and the hind legs stretch out like a tail.  In flight, pe'a fanua 
tend to have faster wing beats and shallower wing strokes.  They are less likely to soar in thermals and 
generally take a directional route to and from roosting sites at dawn or dusk. 
 
 
 
 
 
White-naped flying fox (pe’a fanua) 
Samoan flying fox (pe’a vao) 
 
Despite these differences, it takes keen eye to distinguish the two species from a distance.  Close up, the 
pe'a vao may sport a white to yellowish triangular patch that starts from the forehead and extends to the 
back of its head, or it may simply exhibit a generally grayish head with or without flecks of white hair 
