 
 
NATURAL HISTORY GUIDE
 
 
89
47.  Samoa's seabirds: tava'e, gogo and manu sina 
 
 
The islands of Samoa are true oceanic islands:  they are not riders on the skirts of any continent, but are the 
tops of huge mountains, rising up through the great ocean depths.  Surrounded as they are by thousands of 
square miles of ocean, it is not surprising that the Samoan Islands have more kinds of seabirds than any 
other type of native wildlife.  In all, 20 species of seabirds are known to nest in Samoa (and many more 
can be seen passing through our area), compared to 18 kinds of resident landbirds and only three kinds of 
mammals (all bat species). 
 
Our seabirds are a diverse group.  Some, such as shearwaters 
and petrels (ta’i’o), are rarely seen, but nest in burrows on the 
tops of mountains like Lata and Pioa.  Their eerie calls can be 
heard at night in places such as Afono Pass.  Others like 
frigatebirds (atafa) and boobies (fua'o) are seen flying around 
our coasts, but nest on the high cliffs of Pola or in trees on the 
remote north side of Tutuila.  The tern family has many 
different looking birds living here, including the solid black and 
brown noddies (gogo), the beautiful blue-grey noddy (laia), the 
white tern (manu sina), and the grey-backed tern (gogo sina).  
Here we will discuss the three most common and conspicuous 
seabirds of Tutuila:  the tava'e, manu sina, and gogo. 
 
The tava'e (tava'esina), or White-tailed Tropicbird, is one of Samoa's most beautiful creatures.  The sight 
of a tava'e soaring overhead is unforgettable, as its gleaming white feathers and graceful tail streamers 
blaze against the deep indigo of the Polynesian sky.  Happily, it is also a familiar sight, as these birds are 
common all around Tutuila. 
 
The tava'e, so graceful in the air, is comical and awkward on land, so much so that Samoan legends 
describe the bird as lazy or dim-witted.  In fact, tava'e are probably as industrious and intelligent as your 
average bird.  Their awkwardness results from the fact that their legs and feet are tiny for the size of the 
bird, and are placed far back on the body.  Thus, all tava'e can do on land is to shuffle along, bumping their 
powerful chest muscles on the ground.  Luckily for them, tava'e spend little time on land.   
 
They typically nest high in rainforest trees, preferring protected sites such as large hollows or clumps of 
ferns or other plant material.  Here they lay a single large egg.  At hatching, the young tropicbird is one of 
the cutest of all baby birds -- a completely round ball of silvery fluff.  As they grow, they molt into their 
juvenile plumage, with black and white barred feathers across their back. This is their appearance when 
they leave the nest on their first flight toward the sea, often a mile or more away.  The fledglings often 
seem to have problems with this flight, based on the number of young tava'e that are brought in to our 
office, unable to fly.  These youngsters are usually very gentle, and with several days of feeding with 
sardines or other fish, they often regain their strength and are able to fly away. 
 
Tava'e are master fishermen, making plunging dives for squid and a variety of small fish.  One of their 
favorites are flying fish -- I've often wondered whether they catch the flying fish in the air or while they're 
swimming.  The tava'e is well known to Samoan fishermen, who watch its behavior at sea to help them 
locate schools of masimasi and other fish.  The tava'e is important to human fishermen for another reason: 
its feathers are prized for fishing lures.  The gleaming white breast feathers are tied to hooks and used to 
attract malau (squirrelfish) and other fish.  It is a traditional belief that only feathers from living birds stay 
dry and shiny after repeated use, and it was a badge of honor for a Samoan youth to climb a tava'e nesting 
tree and pluck out the plumes.  This supplied a lure while causing no harm to the birds. 
