 
 
NATURAL HISTORY GUIDE
 
 
23
on this matter have suggested that rising seawater temperatures, tides, weather, moonlight or other 
biological signals may play a role in starting the maturation and release of the epitokes.  Once the 
swarming begins, the presence of the palolo spawn in the water probably stimulates other palolo to 
release their mature epitokes. 
 
Rules For Predicting Emergence.  Everyone seems to have their own methods for predicting when the 
best palolo rising will occur.  Several natural clues that preceded the palolo rising enabled islanders to 
predict the correct timing for palolo swarming.  These included the flowering of the moso’oi tree, the 
closing of the palulu flower (a morning glory), a strong smell from the reef, brown foamy scum (from 
coral spawn) on the ocean, toxins occurring in reef fish, and abrupt weather changes or bad weather 
such as thunderstorms or lightning.   
 
So, will palolo swarm seven days after the full moon in October or November?  One set of rules used to 
predict the main night of emergence depends on the calendar date of October's third quarter moon 
(seven days after October's full moon).  If it occurs: 
 
1.  From October 1 to 8, palolo will not appear  
     until November. 
 
2.  From October 8 to 18, palolo will not appear in 
     October or the swarming will be weak followed  
     by a stronger appearance in November. 
 
3.  From October 19 to November 7, there will be  
     a single, strong swarming centered on this date. 
 
4.  From November 8 to 17, there will be a strong 
     appearance on this date, possibly following a 
     weaker swarming during the previous month  
     (see number 2 above). 
 
To further complicate matters, the actual time of emergence of 
palolo in Samoa differs between islands.  They usually appear 
around 2 am in the Manu’a Islands, 1 am on Tutuila and closer to 4 
or 5 am in western Samoa.  This difference is somewhat consistent 
from year to year and cannot be accounted for by difference in 
tides or moonrise.  The difference in tides between islands is far 
less than one hour and the time of moonrise is only minutes apart.       
 
  David Itano, DMWR
A good catch of palolo.
