 
 
NATURAL HISTORY GUIDE
 
 
21
in 1998 when we experienced very low tides due to a strong El Nino event.  The exposed corals turned 
white and died. 
 
As if that weren’t enough, we are also 
seeing more coral diseases on our reefs 
(who would have thought that corals can 
catch diseases?).  Presumably the heat-
stressed condition of the corals makes 
them more vulnerable to diseases that 
had formerly been rare.  In the photo at 
right, a white band of death is sweeping 
across the coral, from left to right.  
Behind the white band (to the left), the 
coral polyps were killed about a week or 
two ago, giving time for greenish algae 
to start growing on the dead coral 
skeleton.  The white band itself is a zone 
of freshly killed polyps and exposed 
white coral skeleton.  In front of the 
white band (to the right) is the last 
remaining bit of live coral (purplish in color).  The cause of this disease is not known yet.  Although 
coral diseases have probably always been around, they spread rapidly on our reefs beginning in 2002.   
 
To round-out this rather negative view of the problems coral face in our modern world, an even greater 
threat to them is a projected change in water chemistry in the ocean due to global warming.  Just as 
carbon dioxide (the main greenhouse gas causing global warming) is increasing in the air, it also 
increases in seawater in its dissolved form.  That will lower the pH of seawater which, in turn, may slow 
the rate at which corals build their calcium carbonate skeletons.  The result is that coral growth would 
be slowed and there might even be an increased erosion of the reef itself.  
 
Scientists predict that episodes of warm water temperatures will become more frequent due to a general 
warming of the earth.  That's bad news for us.  While it's unlikely that all of our corals will die off as the 
environment gets warmer, the number and/or abundance of corals may well decline here.  That might 
impact American Samoa in two general ways.  First, coral growth might not keep up with rising sea 
levels or the reef itself may begin to erode, thereby allowing more storm waves to reach our shorelines 
and cause damage to roads and houses.  Second, a reduction in coral growth and number of species 
could reduce the diversity of habitats required by fish, so a downturn in reef catches could eventually 
occur.  Both of these changes would probably occur at a slow but steady pace over the next 30 years. 
 
What to do?  Not too much, unfortunately, because American 
Samoa has little impact on the world's changing climate.  On the 
other hand, it makes sense not to worsen the situation by further 
stressing our coral reefs with rubbish, sewage from piggeries, or 
dirt (sediment) from land-use activities that flows into streams 
and out onto the reefs.  The brown water we see entering the 
ocean from streams after a heavy rainfall is harmful to the 
corals.  Additionally, we should locate and protect any areas 
where corals appear to be naturally resilient to bleaching events.  
These hardy survivors could then help re-seed other areas where 
the corals had died.  
P.Craig, NPS 
