 
 
NATURAL HISTORY GUIDE
 
 
46
In contrast, both kinds of aoa are very important for wildlife.  In fact, a good case can be made that they 
are the most important tree species for the fruit-eating birds and bats of Samoa.  There are two reasons 
why they are so important.  First, they produce enormous amounts of fruit.  When one of the huge 
banyans has crop of fruit, its spreading crown has room for a whole army of hungry  fruit-eaters.  In a 
single tree, I have seen three lupe (Pacific Pigeons), eight manutagi (Purple-capped Fruit-Doves), four 
manuma (Many-colored Fruit-Doves), a dozen fuia (Samoan Starling), scattered iao (Wattled 
Honeyeaters) and miti vao (Polynesian Starlings) -- all at the same time.  No other Samoan trees provide 
such a feast.  The second reason why banyans are so important is that they fruit at all times of year.  
Most kinds of large forest trees have a definite fruiting season:  for example, asi tends to fruit from 
April to July, but some banyans have ripe fruit every month of the year.  Between 10-30% of banyan 
trees have ripe fruit in any given month.  This means that a fruit-eater can always find banyan fruit, even 
if all other fruits were out of season. 
 
One Samoan bird has come to depend on the reliable 
banyan.  This is the manuma, or Many-colored Fruit-Dove, 
one of the rarest birds on Tutuila.  In two years of 
observation, I have recorded manuma eating fruit on 99 
occasions.  In 98 of these 99 times, the manuma were 
eating banyan fruit (the one exception was berries of the 
soga bush).  One probable reason why the manuma is so 
rare today is the loss of many banyan trees, particularly in 
the Tafuna Plain.  If this bird is to survive here, it is 
essential that banyan trees be protected, and, if possible, 
increased in number. 
 
In addition to their important role in feeding wildlife, aoa trees also provide homes for many animals.  
Lulu (Barn Owls) frequently sleep and nest in the hollow trunks.  Tava'e (tropicbirds) find large nesting 
shelters, and fuia (Samoan Starlings) and ti'otala (White-collared Kingfisher) find protected nest holes.  
From its open, sheltered base to its spreading, fruit-laden crown, a banyan tree is a haven for wildlife. 
 
Sadly, banyans today are under threat in American Samoa.  Many were severely damaged by cyclones 
in 1990-91.  Many others have been cut down, and more are threatened by continued development, 
particularly in the Tafuna Plain.  Some of the most magnificent banyans that still stand have been make 
into gigantic trash barrels, their hollow trunks filled with mounds of used diapers and rusting cans.  This 
garbage is sometimes burned, which can kill the banyan even if that is not intended. 
 
What can you do?  Give banyans the respect and protection they deserve.  If your family is lucky 
enough to have an aoa on your land, please take care of it.  Don't cut it, burn it , or use it as a garbage 
dump.  If you notice a young banyan getting started, help it along by clearing away vines.  If you know 
someone who has a banyan on their land, talk to them about its importance for wildlife.  The banyan is a 
living testimony to the bounty and riches of Samoan nature, and is a lifeline for our wildlife.  
 
Pepper Trail 
DMWR 
