 
 
NATURAL HISTORY GUIDE
 
 
20
8.  When corals turn white and die 
 
 
Coral reefs in American Samoa have turned pure white on several occasions in recent years.  They look 
freshly bleached, quite pretty, but that's a clear sign that they are in trouble. 
 
Two very different kinds of stress cause corals to turn 
white: (1) clorox bleach, and (2) warm water 
temperatures.  Clorox bleaching happens from time to 
time when a foolish fisherman dumps clorox onto the reef 
to kill fish.  This is very short-sighted because it also kills 
everything else in the vicinity -- young fish, crabs, snails 
and corals -- and that harms the reef itself and reduces 
everyone else's catch. 
 
Unusually warm water temperatures, due either to weather 
events or global warming, can also cause the coral to 
bleach.  It only takes a slight increase above normal water 
temperature to bleach the coral.  Bleaching can be caused 
by a short-term exposure (1-2 days) at temperature 
elevations of 3-4 degrees, or by long-term exposure 
(weeks) at elevations of only 1-2 degrees.  To a diver, this 
may look like a pretty snowfall on the reef, but it indicates 
that the reef is seriously stressed. 
 
Because most corals live only in warm tropical waters, it 
seems odd that corals will die when the water gets slightly 
warmer.  They live close to the hottest temperature that 
they can tolerate, so it doesn't take much to push them 
over the limit.  To explain what is happening, recall that 
corals are animals with colorful plant-like cells 
(zooxanthellae) living in their tissues.  These cells use the sun's light to produce food which is also used 
by the coral animal.  Many coral animals receive much of their food this way, so this relationship is 
quite important to the coral animal.  The animal, in turn, provides the zooxanthellae with nutrients and a 
secure place to live.  Both the coral and the zooxanthellae benefit from this arrangement. 
 
When the coral is stressed by warmer than usual 
temperatures, the zooxanthellae are released from the 
coral, for reasons known only to them.  What's left is a 
rather colorless coral animal overlying a bright white coral 
skeleton (see drawing).  The animal portion of the coral 
may eventually recover its zooxanthellae and continue 
living, or it may die, depending on how stressed it gets.  
It's easy to tell when portions of the coral die because they 
become covered with fuzzy green algae. 
 
A little bleaching now occurs here during most summers, 
but it was particularly bad in 1994, 2002 and 2003.  Not 
all coral species were affected then, but those in shallow 
waters were hardest hit, although some bleaching down to 
the 130-foot depth was observed.  Bleaching also occurred 
 
Normal coral polyp        Heat-stress causes the 
with plant-like cells        coral polyp to release 
inside the coral's           its plant-like cells and 
tissues.                          turn white like the 
                                      photo to the right. 
Underwater photo showing several kinds of 
corals that turned white, or “bleached”, due 
to heat stress in 1994. 
