 
 
NATURAL HISTORY GUIDE
 
 
32
That appears to be exactly what has happened in 
American Samoa  because there are relatively few and/or 
small sizes of the species commonly taken for food left on 
our reefs.  The graph at right shows the pooled lengths of 
all surgeonfish, unicornfish, parrotfish, snappers, 
emperors, groupers, jacks and sharks sighted during 
extensive scientific surveys on the reef slope at the 30-ft 
depth.  Few fish were 16 inches (40 cm) or larger.  This 
depressing picture is not a sudden event – surveys in 1996 
and 2004 show similar results. 
 
Even though current levels of fishing do not seem 
excessive, the area of our reefs is rather small and 
consequently it is easily fished out.  Fish stocks may well have been depleted years ago – 
knowledgeable locals and elder Samoans recall seeing far more fish on our reefs 25 years ago. 
 
A meaningful recovery will require nothing short of a territory-wide reduction in the harvest of coral 
reef fishes for at least 10 years, with specific protection for the larger fish.  That’s what the long life 
span of the fish is telling us.  There is no quick fix.  Additionally, setting aside some areas as marine 
protected areas is an essential component for the recovery of fish stocks.  To be effective, such areas 
must provide long-term protection by being permanently closed to all fishing.  Marine protected areas 
that are periodically opened up to fishing may satisfy short-term goals, but they do not allow the fish to 
grow big and old, and it is these old-timers that produce the most fish eggs.  For example, one large 
snapper (mu) 24 inches long releases as many eggs as 212 snappers that are 17 inches long. 
 
So, that 18 year old alogo was not just an unusual trophy – it was also a vital member of the fish 
community that spawned year after year, thereby insuring that some young fish survived to maintain a 
healthy population of alogo on our reefs. 
                                                                                                                                  
Two fisheries in American Samoa currently target coral reef fish 
-- the subsistence fishery and the artisanal (small-scale 
commercial) fishery.  Subsistence fishing includes the multiple 
ways that Samoans have always caught nearshore fish for food.  
In modern times, this includes rod and reel, bamboo pole and 
line, free-diving, throw nets, gillnets, and gleaning (hand-
picking clams and octopus).  Stone weirs for atule and enu 
baskets for juvenile goatfish (i’asina) are still used in Manu’a.  
On Tutuila, subsistence catches appear to be modest in size and 
have been declining steadily over the past 20 years due to 
lifestyle changes (more people have regular jobs). 
                                                                                                                                
The artisanal fishery that sells reef fish to local stores is a 
relatively recent development.  It is conducted by teams of night 
divers who use underwater flashlights and spears to catch 
sleeping fish.  In the mid 1990s, many of these divers switched 
from free-diving to scuba diving, which greatly increased the 
number of fish they caught.  This type of heavy fishing had a 
significant overfishing impact on our reef fish populations, so 
the use of scuba gear while spear fishing was banned in the 
Territory in 2001.                                                                                                                                  
 
P.Craig, NPS                                                                           
Roadside fish seller 
0
500
1000
1500
2000
4
8
12
16
20
24
28
Fish length (inches)
Fish observed
