 
 
NATURAL HISTORY GUIDE
 
 
38
19.  Whales  Ho ! 
 
 
September and October are the peak months when humpback whales (tafola) visit our balmy waters.  
It's almost impossible not to get excited when one is spotted.  Most of us feel inexplicably privileged for 
a brief glimpse into their mysterious world, and there's an uncontrollable urge to shout 'thar she blows'. 
 
Part of our fascination with whales is their 
huge size, of course.  Adult humpbacks 
(Megaptera novaeangliae) grow up to 50 
feet long and weigh about 40 metric tons 
(which equals the combined weight of 200 
sumo wrestlers).  We rarely get a chance to 
see the whole whale, except when they 
make a spectacular leap (“breach”) out of 
the water.  We usually see only their air 
spout or their humped back as they prepare 
to dive. 
 
Humpbacks are air-breathing mammals (like ourselves) that live their complete lives in the ocean. They 
reproduce like all land mammals, but they do it underwater.  Whales obviously have to make sure that 
their babies don't drown while being born.  Mother whales nurse their young for about a year. 
 
These whales eat small schooling fishes and krill (small shrimps).  They feed by gulping in tons of 
water in a single mouthful, and then strain the food out as they expel the water.  The out-going water is 
filtered through specialized structures called “baleen”, which looks (with a little imagination) like a 
mouthful of coconut fronds.  Humpbacks lack real teeth because they have no need to bite or chew their 
tiny food items.  It seems odd that the whale, which is one of the world's largest animals ever, feeds on 
such small things. 
 
The appearance of humpbacks in Samoa is an important segment of their grand migration up and down 
the South Pacific Ocean. During the warm months of the southern hemisphere, our whales feed in the 
rich waters of Antarctica, located 3,200 miles to the south of us (see map).  Biologists call this particular 
group of whales “Stock-E” (formerly called “Group-5”).  When Antarctic's bitter winter sets in, Stock-E 
whales seek warmer waters.  They migrate northward, with some going towards Australia and others 
migrating towards Tonga.  Apparently most of this latter group 
remains near Tonga, but at least some migrate onward to 
Samoa.  However, one of our whales was sighted near Tahiti, 
so their migration patterns still hold some surprises for us. 
 
A few humpbacks might arrive in Samoa as early as July or 
leave here as late as December, but they are most common 
here in September and October.  They occur in small groups of 
adults or in mother-calf pairs.  Humpbacks have been sighted 
around all 7 of the islands in the Territory, but we don't know 
how many are actually here.  They migrate here to mate and 
give birth to their young.  And, interestingly, they stop feeding 
while here -- only when they return to the Antarctic do they 
resume feeding. 
 
