 
 
NATURAL HISTORY GUIDE
 
 
35
We have some very interesting migration data for green sea turtles at Rose Atoll (see map below), 
where a tagging study was conducted in the mid-1990s.  In all, 10 tagged turtles were recovered after 
nesting at the atoll.  Eight swam 800 miles directly to Fiji (unfortunately two of them were eaten when 
they got there).  Another went past Fiji to Vanuatu, and the last one went in the completely opposite 
direction to French Polynesia near Tahiti. 
 
It's understandable why the adult turtles do not stay at Rose Atoll after nesting, because their favorite 
food (seagrass) is absent there.  But I wonder why don't they just stay in Fiji where they have both 
seagrass and nesting beaches. 
 
Anyway, this pattern of large-scale movements between a turtle's nesting area and feeding area means 
that turtle stocks in the South Pacific Ocean are all mixed together.  While some of “our” turtles were 
caught in Fiji, the reciprocal is also true -- turtles that feed in our waters probably originated from 
islands elsewhere in the South Pacific.  This mixing greatly complicates conservation efforts.  It means 
that region-wide cooperation among the island countries of the South Pacific is essential; otherwise, 
while we try to protect turtles in American Samoa, our turtles may be killed later when they migrate to 
other islands. 
 
Tough federal and territorial laws exist in American Samoa to protect turtles and their eggs, because 
they are an endangered species.  Depending on the circumstances, there is a $500 to $250,000 penalty 
and up to one year in jail, for killing a turtle or importing any turtle product into the Territory (shells, 
stuffed turtles, turtle combs, etc.).  Fortunately fewer turtles seem to be taken in American Samoa, 
probably due to their scarcity but also due to outreach programs that inform children and villagers about 
the endangered status of the turtles. 
 
In addition to education efforts, we must protect both the turtles and their 
habitat.  Sandy beaches are essential for turtle nesting areas, so hauling sand 
away from our beaches results in the loss of critical habitat for these species.  
No beaches, no nesting turtles. 
 
Although some villagers may still like to eat turtle meat and eggs, the point to 
remember is that turtles are a disappearing resource in American Samoa.  
They are a part of Samoa's heritage and need to be vigorously protected, or 
they may be lost altogether.  It is a sad commentary that many young 
Samoans have never even seen a live sea turtle. 
 
 
P.Craig, NPS 
