NATURAL HISTORY GUIDE 
 
 
10
3.  Biodiversity in our rainforests and coral reefs 
 
 
There's a certain mystique about the word 'biodiversity' that seems to be associated with images of 
steamy jungles or wondrous new medicines, but the word more specifically refers to the number of 
species or 'species richness' of an area.  One reason why tropical areas are so fascinating is that they 
contain the highest numbers of plant and animal species found anywhere on earth. 
 
American Samoa sits squarely in the tropics, so we should have a high biological diversity here, but we 
do and we don't.  There is a sharp contrast between the number of plant and animal species that live on 
land here (few) versus those that live in our coastal waters (many).  Most small islands in the South 
Pacific share this characteristic. 
 
To start at the beginning, when our islands emerged as fiery volcanoes from the depths of the sea, they 
were devoid of plants or animals.  As time passed and the terrain became more hospitable, life for 
organisms became possible, but the plants and animals still had to cross vast ocean distances to get here 
from someplace else. 
A quick look at a map will show one reason why few land 
species got here.  We are really quite isolated in the Pacific 
Ocean, far from potential sources of plants and animals.  To 
reach our shores, organisms would either have to blow in on 
the wind, drift for hundreds or thousands of miles on some 
piece of floating debris, or be carried in by another organism 
like plant seeds in a bird's stomach.  The species that were 
successful probably got here by 'island hopping' across the 
Pacific, spreading from island to island over the course of 
many thousands or millions of years. 
 
The difficulty in getting here is best illustrated by the sparse 
representation of native mammal species.  Over the past 1.3 
million years that Tutuila Island has existed, only 3 mammal 
species (all bats) got here and established viable populations.  
Our native species list also includes about 478 flowering plants and ferns, 25 resident land and water 
birds, 20 resident seabirds, 7 skinks, 4 geckos, 2 sea turtles, 1 snake, and occasional other visitors (this 
list does not include all the introduced non-native species like rats, dogs, pigs, toads, myna birds, and 
many weeds). 
  
There's a second reason for our low diversity on land -- the small size of our islands.  In general, the 
smaller the island, the fewer the species on it.  For example, tiny Rose Atoll (0.4 sq mi) supports only 5 
native plant species, 21 birds (virtually all seabirds), 2 geckos, and 2 sea turtles. 
 
So, although American Samoa technically has 'tropical rainforests' due to our high level of rainfall (200-
300 inches per year in some mountainous areas), we lack the high species richness found in the jungle 
rainforests of Indonesia, Africa or South America that are filled with hooting monkeys, poison dart 
frogs, pythons and flesh-eating piranhas. 
 
On the other hand, because of our isolation, some terrestrial species in Samoa have evolved over many 
thousands of years to such an extent that they have become distinctly different species found nowhere 
else but here.  For example, 1% of our plant species occur only in American Samoa; 30% of our plant 
species and the Samoan starling (fuia) occur only in the Samoan archipelago (which includes western 
