NATURAL HISTORY GUIDE 
 
 
13
move from east to west.  For that reason, the islands in 
western Samoa are about 1 million years older than the 
islands in American Samoa.  (Early geologists got this 
direction of movement backwards.)   The newest 
volcanic eruption in our island chain is forming about 
30 miles east of Ta'u Island, but it will probably be 
another few hundred years before this sub-surface 
volcano, named Vailulu'u, breaks the sea surface (in 
2005 it was 1800 feet below the surface but growing 
rapidly). 
 
But something else really exciting also happens in our area.  
As Tutuila Island glides westward, a part of our plate collides 
with another plate to the west of us (the Australian Plate), and 
our plate actually rips in two at this point (see diagram).  One 
piece of our plate continues moving towards China, but the 
other piece slides down into the 6-mile deep Tongan Trench 
and under the Australian Plate, never to be seen again. 
 
The collision of these two colossal pieces of the earth's surface 
causes the seafloor to bend and rip, which in turn causes some 
earthquakes.  This is shown on the map at right which 
pinpoints all earthquakes (magnitude 6.0 or greater) in the 
Pacific region in 2004.  Samoa and the Tongan 
Trench are a geologically active area and this is 
presumably the cause of renewed volcanic activity in 
our archipelago.  Recent surveys suggest how this 
might be happening.  Long cracks  in the seafloor 
have been discovered between the Samoan islands 
and the Tongan Trench.  The cracks are oriented in 
an east-west direction and seem to be formed as the 
seafloor bends southward down into the top of the 
Tongan Trench.  These cracks may make it easier for 
the hot magma beneath the crust to spew upward and 
emerge as young lava on top of our old islands.   
 
And all this is happening a mere 100 miles south of 
Tutuila Island.  We live in a very unique area. 
 
Finally, most oceanic volcanoes eventually disappear.  As time passes, two things happen.  Volcanoes 
erode continuously as ocean waves attack its shorelines and rivers gouge into its terrain.  In addition, the 
weight of a newly formed volcano is so heavy that it causes the volcano to sink slowly back down into 
the sea.  Rose Atoll and Swains Island are good examples of sunken volcanoes.  In the distant past, Rose 
and Swains may have been magnificent mountainous islands with beautiful rainforests and coral reefs.  
But that's ancient history now, because those islands, over a period of several million years, eventually 
sank out of sight.  All that remains are tiny amounts of coral that grew up from the peaks of the 
mountains as they slipped below the sea surface. 
 
Not to worry.  Tutuila Island should be around for a few more million years. 
P.Craig, NPS
