 
 
NATURAL HISTORY GUIDE
 
 
51
26.  Life in a Samoan stream:  fish, snails & shrimp 
 
 
Streams are the plumbing of our islands.  They rely solely on rain, which seeps from steep rainforest-
clad hills and trickles through the porous volcanic soil carrying with it the products of the land.  Small 
streams join with others to create a mosaic of channels across the islands.  Waterfalls, cascades, pools 
and riffles make each stream unique and influence the kinds of animals found there.   
 
Our freshwater stream animals play an important role in maintaining a healthy stream ecosystem.  These 
species might be overlooked because they are shy and rather blandly colored, which might lead to the 
assumption that they are not there at all, but that of course is not true.  The best way to observe them is 
to find a spot on a rock and quietly watch until they emerge from their hiding places.  Keep in mind that 
from the animal’s point of view there is a lot going on.  Animals are constantly interacting with each 
other as well as with their environment.  The presence of a predator, for example, will have a huge 
influence on the behavior of its prey.  It is a constant game of cat and mouse, eat or be eaten.  Habitat 
type, or where an animal likes to live, is also very important.  Certain species prefer pools, others like 
shallow riffles, and for most species, waterfalls are barriers to their upstream movements although a few 
hardy species can climb up them. 
 
Fish.  Predatory fishes, like the freshwater eel 
(Angulia spp.), mountain bass (Kulia spp.), and 
dusky sleeper (Eleotris fusca) tend to dominate the 
lower reaches of a stream and feed on smaller fish 
and shrimp.  They are only average climbers and 
cannot make it up the steep slopes of a waterfall.  
Instead they rely mainly on their powerful swimming 
and gliding ability to move through small rapids and 
over large boulders and rocks.  Look for eels in 
crevices and holes.  Mountain bass are often seen in 
pools not far from the ocean.  Their silvery sides and flag-like tails make them easy to spot.  The dusky 
sleeper uses stealth and surprise to catch its prey.  It props itself on rocks using its fins and turns darker 
for camouflage when ambushing prey.  For this reason this species is not an easy one to spot.  
 
Herbivorous fishes, like the small gobies (Stiphodon spp. and Sicyopterus spp.), are usually present in 
large numbers.  They may be seen in quiet riffles and pools grazing on long green algal strands or the 
slippery brown algae coating the rocks.  An 
interesting feature of the goby is that its pelvic fins 
form a suction cup that enables the goby to cling to 
rocks and climb waterfalls.  One goby (Stiphodon 
hydoreibatus) is endemic to Samoa and found 
nowhere else in the world. 
 
Snails.  Stream snails, which all belong to the family Neritidae, are herbivores that graze on the algae 
growing on stream rocks.  About a dozen species are known locally.  Two distinct types of neritid snails 
are present.  One is the rounded black/brown shell of the Neritina or Clithon species.  The shell of these 
has little or no spire and an interesting device called an “operculum” that acts like a trap door.  This 
allows the snail to retract into its shell and literally close the door -- a great mechanism to have when 
you do not want to be eaten. 
 
