 
 
NATURAL HISTORY GUIDE
 
 
86
The toloa is a great wanderer.  The bird is found across a huge geographic area, extending from Indonesia 
to French Polynesia, and south to New Zealand and Australia.  The toloa is a strong, fast flier, and 
commonly flies between islands.  It seems likely that the small population on Aunu'u, which was apparently 
absent in the late 1980's, may have recolonized American Samoa from western Samoa, where the duck is 
slightly more common.  This gives us reason to hope that the toloa may return to areas that it formerly used, 
if the wetlands are preserved, and the duck is protected from hunting.  So ... if you see a toloa, consider 
yourself lucky, and please don't disturb it.  Perhaps one day Samoa's special duck will once again be a 
common sight. 
 
The matu'u, or Pacific Reef-Heron, is a common sight today.  With its 
long legs and long neck, often curved in an S-shape, the matu'u is one of 
Samoa's most recognizable birds.  One interesting fact about the matu'u is 
that it comes in two color forms, either dark gray or pure white, although 
almost all the matu'u in Samoa are dark gray.  In other areas, particularly 
atolls like Swains Island or Rose Atoll, almost all the matu'u are white.  It 
seems that in Polynesia the dark forms are found on volcanic islands, with 
dark lava rocks, while the white birds occur on atolls with white sandy 
shorelines.  In many other parts of its range, however, including Fiji, both 
white and gray forms occur commonly in the same area.  The reason for 
the matu'u's two color forms remains a unclear.  
 
The matu'u is the master spear fisherman of the bird world.  It stalks slowly 
across the reef flat, scanning for the slightest movement, and then throws its 
long neck forward as fast as lightning, catching its prey with its long sharp 
beak.  It feeds on a wide variety of reef creatures, including fish, crabs, and snails. 
 
Although the matu'u usually makes its living feeding on the coral reef, it also uses the freshwater wetlands 
of Samoa.  Mangrove areas like the Nu'uuli Pala are frequent feeding sites, and the birds will also hunt for 
food in freshwater streams.  These rainforest stream valleys are the matu'u's favored nesting areas, where 
the herons build their large nests high in the trees.  Some matu'u also nest on offshore islets, and have even 
been reported to nest on ledges in caves.  Usually three pale green eggs are laid. 
 
Strict protection of Samoa's wetlands is essential if the toloa is to regain its place among our familiar native 
birds and if the matu'u is to continue to be a common resident of our shoreline villages.  Please help spread 
the message that landfills kill a very important part of Samoa's natural environment -- our wetlands. 
 
Pepper Trail, DMWR 
