 
 
NATURAL HISTORY GUIDE
 
 
67
35.  Common pests and diseases of local agricultural plants 
 
 
Gazing up at the beautiful mountains on our islands, we see hillsides of lush green tropical foliage -- a 
picture of botanical health.  That's true for the most part, but if we look closer, we notice that some 
plants can get sick and die, or they can be injured when insects, animals, strong winds or landslides 
damage their leaves, stems or roots.  Sometimes insect pests or diseases spread fast, injuring or killing 
many plants over a large area.  Then we take notice, particularly if we were growing those plants to eat.  
Here are five common plant pests and diseases that can cause serious damage to local agricultural 
plants. 
 
Taro leaf blight disease (lega, laumu).  Many people became acutely 
aware of this plant disease in 1993-94 when it destroyed most of the 
Samoan taro crop.  The disease is caused by a fungus (Phythophthora 
colocasiae) that has been in Fiji for many years, but we don't know how 
it came to American Samoa.  Perhaps it arrived here on taro tops 
(tiapula) from another island, or its fungal spores blew in on the winds 
of Cyclone Val in 1991.  Taro leaf blight is most severe when the 
weather is cool and wet.  Rain splashes spores of the fungus into the air, 
which are then blown by wind from plant to plant.  The expanding 
brown spots made by this fungus cause leaves to die faster than normal, 
so the plant must use its energy to make more leaves instead of storing 
the energy in the taro corm (i'o ole talo) that we want to eat.  Farmers 
are now growing taro varieties from Micronesia that are more resistant 
to the fungus.  The Palau taro, for example, still gets the disease, but less 
severely, so the leaves live longer and corms are of normal size. 
 
Armyworms (anufe-ailatalo).  These insects are more appropriately called cluster caterpillars, because 
they are not worms at all.  They are the juvenile stage of a thick-bodied grayish-brown moth 
(Spodoptera litura) that flies about at night.  It is a serious pest for many crops and may occur 
throughout the year.  The caterpillars are often found on taro leaves in small 
numbers and if found soon enough, they can be picked off by hand before they eat 
too much of the leaves.  Sometimes there are so many that they can't be removed 
fast enough.  As with taro leaf blight, this has a major impact on the 
plant, because energy is taken from the corm (i'o ole talo) to replace 
damaged leaves, so the harvest is reduced.  The female moth lays 200 to 
300 eggs in a cluster during the night.  After the eggs hatch, the young 
larvae feed together, eating larger and larger holes in the leaves as they 
grow, until only the thick ribs of the taro leaf remain.  The mature larva 
falls to the ground, forms a pupa which is the resting stage when the 
caterpillar changes shape and grows wings, and afterwards emerges as 
an adult moth that flies off to lay more eggs.  The complete life cycle, 
eggs to adult, takes only about 30 days.  In American Samoa there are several friendly insects, mainly 
small wasps, that attack and kill armyworms.  But if the armyworms are too numerous, the wasps cannot 
control them and considerable damage to the plant may result.  Unfortunately, spraying the armyworms 
with pesticides also kills the helpful wasps. 
 
Banana bunchy top virus (laufeti'iti'i-vaelusi).  This is one of the most serious diseases of bananas.  The 
virus can be so devastating that some regions of the world affected by it, like parts of Hawaii, are no 
longer able to produce bananas commercially.  For unknown reasons, places like American Samoa are 
less severely affected.  It may have something to do with the small insect, an aphid (afiti), that carries 
