 
 
NATURAL HISTORY GUIDE
 
 
77
40.  Samoa's  starlings 
 
 
 
Starlings are a group of birds with a real image problem.  Over much of the world, “starling” means just 
one thing -- the Common, or European Starling.  This plump, short-tailed, oily black bird was originally 
found in Europe, but it has spread across the cool, temperate countries of the world, from the US to 
China, and from Australia to Argentina.  Everywhere it goes, this bird becomes a pest in both cities and 
the countryside, often driving out native birds and destroying fruit crops. 
 
However, starlings are much more than this one obnoxious species.  Most starlings are found in the 
tropics, and they are a varied, interesting and often beautiful family of birds.  In the Pacific, starlings are 
a characteristic and important part of our native birdlife.  In fact, the most unique of all our birds in 
American Samoa is the fuia or Samoan Starling. 
 
Why is the fuia so special?  Well, not because of its appearance. 
With its dull brownish-black color, the fuia could hardly be called 
beautiful.  No, the fuia is special because it is the only American 
Samoan bird that is “endemic” to Samoa.  This is a word used by 
scientists to describe something found in only one place.  The fuia 
is found only in the islands of American and western Samoa.  All 
our other birds are found in at least one other group of islands.  
Therefore, if the fuia became extinct in the Samoas, there wouldn't 
be a single one left in the world. 
 
Fortunately, there is little danger that the fuia will become extinct.  
It is a survivor, a real Samoan success story.  It is the most 
adaptable bird we have, equally at home in Pago Pago, in small 
villages, in plantations and in the rainforest.  The secret to its adaptability is its eating habits -- a fuia 
will eat almost anything.  They gobble down a wide variety of fruit, from the hard seeds of the mamala 
tree to the big stinky fruits of nonu bushes, from the leathery fruits of lau pata to the soft figs of the 
mati.  They also love insects, including big stick insects, caterpillars, and other agricultural pests.  
Therefore, fuia are friends to farmers, and deserve our protection.  Fuia even eat lizards, and indulge 
their taste for sweets with visits to lick up the nectar of gatae flowers.  Because of their broad diet, fuia 
can always find food, and can live almost anywhere there are trees. 
 
As in most Samoan birds, male and female fuia look almost the same. The species seems to nest in all 
months of the year.  Fuia nests are usually placed in hollows in trees:  snapped-off coconut trunks are 
favorite nest sites.  They will also nest among the dense fronds in the top of a coconut, and even use 
man-made nest sites, like cracked telephone poles.  Fuia eggs are pale blue. 
 
We don't really know very much about the social life of the fuia: for example, do they mate for life?  Do 
they defend territories from other fuia?  Do they stay in one small area, or do they move all around the 
island?  It would be interesting to know more about this most Samoan of our native birds. 
 
The fuia is not our only native starling; it has a small and shy cousin, the miti vao, or Polynesian 
Starling.  Although much less common than the fuia in Samoa, the miti vao has a wider range, being 
found in Fiji, Tonga, and Niue as well as American and western Samoa.  Unlike the fuia, the miti vao is 
almost entirely a bird of the forest, rarely seen in plantations, much less villages.  The reasons for this 
aren't clear.  It seems to have a broad diet, though not quite as accepting as the fuia.  It eats both insects 
and fruit, and is often seen feeding on hard-seeded fruit like mamala and taputoi, though we don't know 
