 
 
NATURAL HISTORY GUIDE
 
 
19
 
 
 
 
A coral polyp with tentacles extended 
Diagram of a coral polyp 
 
 
It’s as if each tiny polyp built a rock-solid house for itself but then, as it grows bigger, it decides to close-
off the bottom rooms in its house.  Then it grows some more and closes-off another layer of bottom 
rooms, and so on.  In this way, the coral polyp always lives in the outer, top layer which has been built 
upon layers and layers of rooms below.  Each polyp also cements its house to those of its adjacent 
neighbors which strengthens the whole structure, resembling a solidly built high-rise apartment complex.   
 
Adding on these new rooms is a slow process.  Growth varies from about 0.5-3 inches per year 
depending on the species.  The photo on the right shows this nicely (it was part of a science project).  
When this particular coral was living on the reef, it was stained with a harmless red die that was 
absorbed only by the outside layer of living 
tissue.  Then, as the coral grew, it added the red 
stain to the new skeleton it was making, thus 
marking the size of the coral at the time it was 
stained.  After the stain was used up, the newly 
laid skeleton was again white.  After a one-year 
period, the coral was sawed in half and we can 
clearly see the pink band inside the coral.  The 
distance from the pink band to the new outer edge 
of the coral is the amount that this coral grew in 
one year (about 0.3 inches in this case, as 
measured on the actual sample). 
 
Over very long time periods, these corals grow into massively strong reef structures that can bear the 
brunt of powerful waves that crash upon them day after day.  The very largest corals on our reefs may 
be hundreds of years old.  Corals are one of the few organisms on earth that continually build on top of 
their old ‘houses’, forming such large solid structures.  This is not like a bird that might build its nest on 
top of another nest, because both of these nests decay and disappear in a short time.  In fact, most 
organisms on earth leave little trace after they die as their bones or shells disintegrate (dust to dust).  Not 
corals.  They build structures much larger and longer-lasting than the Egyptian pyramids.  What other 
organism can do this (except modern man with his steel and cement)? 
 
Consider Swains Island or Rose Atoll, for example.  Both are the remnants of old volcanoes that, after 
millions of years, finally sank back down beneath the ocean’s surface and disappeared altogether as 
volcanic islands usually do (see Chapter 4).  But as they slowly sank, the coral continued to grow on top 
of the submerged mountain tops, layer by layer, keeping pace with the sinking rate of the mountain.  
The thickness of the coral there now is probably hundreds or thousands of feet thick on top of the old 
mountain peak and it's all that’s left poking above the ocean surface.  Were it not for this thick coral 
formation on top of these old mountains, Swains Island and Rose Atoll would not exist today. 
 
 
P.Craig, NPS 
Pink 
mark 
made 
1 year 
earlier.
