 
 
NATURAL HISTORY GUIDE
 
 
73
38.  The rare Many-colored Fruit Dove (manuma) 
 
 
One of the rarest birds that nest on Tutuila is also one of the most beautiful:  the manuma, or Many-
colored Fruit-Dove.   
 
The manuma here is considered a different subspecies than those from Fiji and Tonga because they have 
a slightly different color pattern.  The male manuma is creamy white below and pale yellow above, with 
a dark crimson band across the back, a crimson patch on the forehead, and a purplish-red blotch on the 
breast.  The female is very different and looks like the much more common manutagi, or Purple-capped 
Fruit-Dove.  She is mostly green above and gray below, with a crimson forehead patch.  Unlike the 
manutagi, the female manuma doesn't have a yellow band on its tail. 
 
The manuma was not rare on Tutuila in the 19th and early 20th centuries, according to the journals of 
the early scientific expeditions.  It was usually found in flocks; in 1923 a collector killed 10 birds with a 
single shot into a feeding tree on Ta'u.  However, when the first modern studies of American Samoa's 
birds were done in mid-1970, only a small number of manuma could be found.  Follow-up in the mid-
1980's confirmed the manuma's rarity.  They estimated that the population size on Tutuila was only 
about 80 birds. 
 
After the cyclones in the early 1990s, even 
fewer manuma were seen, and perhaps less 
than 50 remained on all of Tutuila.  Today, 
however, manuma are regularly seen at some 
locations on Tutuila, although not in very 
large numbers.  Biologists would call their 
current distribution rare and local, but they 
are occasionally sighted at many places 
around American Samoa.  Interestingly, 
manuma are much more common in Fiji, 
Samoa and Tonga, sometimes being found 
well away from mature forests. 
 
We know very little about the biology of 
manuma in American Samoa, or why it is 
less common here than elsewhere.  These are 
social birds, often being seen in small flocks, 
but they are also very protective of feeding areas, driving other manuma away from their spot in the 
canopy of a fruiting tree.  One odd thing is that you rarely see the same numbers of each sex -- almost 
always there are several more males than females in any flocks.  We do know that they seem to have a 
very strong preference for the fruits of banyan (aoa) trees, and in American Samoa it is almost always 
seen near or in these trees.  They are also known (from Fiji and Tonga) to eat moso'oi, o'a and magele 
fruits, all of which occur in America Samoa.  Perhaps there are still so few manuma here that they are 
seldom forced to eat anything but their favorite food, but would eat other fruits if necessary. 
 
 
It is dangerous for animals to specialize too much on any one food, especially on remote islands like 
American Samoa.  This can be shown with an example from business.  While a store that sells only 
antique cuckoo-clocks might do fine in New York, Los Angeles, or another big market, it would 
certainly fail very quickly in American Samoa.  There isn't enough business here for such a specialized 
service.  Similarly, an island animal that concentrates on only one kind of food may find itself in trouble 
when that food supply fails.  An animal that lives on a continent can move in search of the food it needs, 
