 
 
NATURAL HISTORY GUIDE
 
 
16
6.  Our deep blue ocean 
 
 
American Samoa is much larger than you might think it is.  The whole Territory covers 117,500 square 
miles, which is about the size of New Zealand or the state of Oregon.  The Territory is big because we 
claim jurisdiction of the ocean that surrounds American Samoa, from the shoreline out to 200 miles 
offshore.  That is standard procedure throughout the world (each country with marine coasts wants to 
protect its coastline and marine resources from others).  To be more precise, American Samoa has 
jurisdiction over territorial waters out to 3 miles, while the US federal government maintains control of 
the zone from 3 to 200 miles from shore. 
 
Most of the Territory is open 
ocean, of course.  Only a 
minuscule 0.1% of the area 
consists of dry land (all 7 islands 
total only 76.1 square miles).  The 
other 99.9% marine portion 
consists of two main habitats -- the 
shallow coastal waters adjacent to 
the islands (a'au, aloalo) and the 
deep waters offshore (vasa).  
Shallow coastal habitats, with their 
coral reefs and colorful fish, are quite limited in total area because our islands slope steeply down into 
deeper water and depths of 2000 feet are reached within 0.5-2 miles from shore.  So, most of our coral 
reefs are restricted to a narrow ring around each island.  There is also some coral on the tops of several 
offshore seamounts in the Territory. 
 
The rest of our marine environment consists of deep blue ocean with a fairly flat seafloor 2-3 miles 
below the sea surface.  The reason for the blue color of the ocean is an interesting one and it is a key 
factor to understanding our ocean ecosystem, so we need to get technical for a moment.  Water by itself 
is highly transparent with a bluish tinge.  What adds other colors to the ocean are, in large part, small 
marine plant-like cells called phytoplankton.  The more phytoplankton in the water, the greener the 
water becomes.  Phytoplankton require two main ingredients to grow well:  sunlight and nutrients 
(fertilizers).  If they have both, they grow in abundance.  This, in turn, supports a productive food web:  
phytoplankton provide food for the microscopic shrimp-like animals (zooplankton), and the zooplankton 
provide food for the fish to eat. 
 
Tropical oceans are not green because conditions are generally not good for phytoplankton growth.  
Although phytoplankton have all the sunlight they could ever want in the surface layer, nutrient levels 
there are too low to support much plant growth.  This occurs because the deep tropical ocean is typically 
stratified into two layers with very different temperatures.  The sun heats up the surface layer, which is 
about 300 feet deep, to a pleasant 840 F, but the deeper layer remains a chilly 420 F.  Because warm 
water is lighter than cold water, the warm ocean water generally stays on top, the cold water stays on the 
bottom.  The two layers do not mix. 
 
That's the rub.  The bottom layer is where the nutrients are, but because of the 2-layer stratification, the 
nutrients can't get up to the surface layer where they are needed to combine with sunlight for plant 
growth.  So, conditions for phytoplankton are not very good in the tropical ocean.  The surface layer has 
lots of light but few nutrients, while the bottom layer has lots of nutrients but no light.  It's pitch black 
down there.  This arrangement doesn't support a very productive foodweb, so there are generally fewer 
fish in tropical oceans than in non-tropical oceans. 
