 
 
NATURAL HISTORY GUIDE
 
 
57
Many of the local snail species have attractively colored shells and have often been used in the making 
of ula or leis and for other ornamental purposes.  For instance, the hanging light fixtures in the old lobby 
of the Rainmaker Hotel in Pago Pago contained 10,000 or more shells of tree snails that used to be 
abundant in the forests of Tutuila. 
 
But now many of our local snail species are disappearing. At least seven species have become extremely 
rare and one of them, Diastole matafaoi from Tutuila, is now extinct.  Others are undoubtedly in trouble 
but have simply not been fully evaluated yet.  The two main reasons for their decline are the same 
reasons that biodiversity is vanishing all over the world.  First is habitat destruction or modification.  As 
native forest is cut down for timber or cleared for agriculture or urban development, the habitat of those 
snail species that depend on the forest disappears and so the snails disappear too.  Second is the 
introduction to the islands of alien species – species that have been brought to the islands by humans, 
either on purpose or accidentally.  These aliens include pigs that destroy the forest by rooting for food 
and creating wallows, plants that grow and reproduce more strongly than the native species and replace 
them in the forest, birds that spread alien plants by carrying their seeds into native forest, rats and ants 
that prey on snails, and many other species that people have introduced to the islands. 
 
These alien species also include snails and slugs that come 
from elsewhere in the world.  Most people are likely to see 
only these aliens unless they hike into the most pristine 
native forest.  Perhaps the most commonly seen are the giant 
African snail (sisi aferika, Achatina fulica) and the large 
black or brown slugs.  But there are many other species that 
are not so obvious but that can be found easily just by turning 
over some leaves on the ground almost anywhere in the 
islands.  The giant African snail is a pest of agriculture and in 
gardens but some of these other less well-known species may also be causing problems for the native 
snail species.  Two of them (Subulina octona and Paropeas achatinaceum) are now the most abundant 
snails in the leaf debris of native forest throughout the islands. It is quite possible that they are 
impacting native snails by out-competing them for the resources they depend upon. 
 
Another alien snail, the predatory snail known as the 
‘cannibal snail’ or ‘rosy wolf snail’ (Euglandina rosea) was 
introduced in an ill-conceived attempt to control the giant 
African snail by eating it.  It was introduced even though 
there is no scientific evidence that it would reduce 
populations of the African snail.  The problem is that it 
attacks native snail species that had evolved in the absence of 
such aggressive predators.  Some of our local species 
reproduce at a very slow rate and this means that their 
populations are highly vulnerable to sustained predation.  Euglandina rosea is thought to have been 
introduced only to Tutuila and Ta’u.  In western Samoa it was introduced to Upolu in the 1990s. 
 
An even more voracious predator of snails, the flatworm Platydemus manokwari, was 
unfortunately introduced to Upolu in 2003 to control the African snail.  This free-
living flatworm appears to be common on Tutuila Island as well.  It is black or dark 
brown, with a single line down its back, and it can grow to almost 3 inches long and 
1/4 inch wide.  This flatworm is believed to have decimated snail populations on other 
Pacific islands. 
 
Robert Cowie 
University of Hawaii 
