 
 
NATURAL HISTORY GUIDE
 
 
81
42.  Familiar and mysterious birds -- the rails 
 
 
The ve'a, or “roadrunner”, is one of Samoa's most recognizable birds.  It is a familiar sight tiptoeing out 
of the grass or running crazily across the road, its neck stretched out and its big feet trying to keep up.  
And its loud, screeching voice is a familiar sound, seeming to complain at the disturbance as we walk to 
the taro patch.  However, for all its abundance, the ve'a is still a little-known bird, quickly disappearing 
from view when disturbed and impossible to follow in the thick grass it favors.  What's more, the ve'a 
has two even more mysterious cousins in American Samoa, and another in western Samoa that, as we 
will see, is the most mysterious Samoan bird of all. 
 
The ve'a and its cousins belong to the family of birds known as the 
rails (named from a old English word meaning to screech -- many of 
these birds have loud, harsh voices).  The ve'a is called the Banded 
Rail, because of the black and white bands on its sides and 
underparts.  It is found all across the Pacific from the Philippines and 
Indonesia to Samoa, Tonga, Fiji, and on to Australia and New 
Zealand.  It is usually common wherever it occurs, with the exception 
of Fiji.  On Fiji this formerly abundant bird has been exterminated on 
the large islands of Vanua Levu and Viti Levu by an introduced predator, the mongoose.  This shows 
how important it is to keep Samoa free from such destructive introduced animals.   
 
The ve'a is a very useful bird, eating many insects that can harm crops.  In fact, it will eat almost 
anything, including fruit, worms, snails, mice, and even toads squashed flat on the roads.  It sometimes 
can be seen deep in the forest, but prefers open areas with dense grass.  Therefore, taro and banana 
plantations are some of its favorite places.  The nest of the ve'a is very hard to find, being built on the 
ground well-hidden in thick grass.   The ve'a lays 4 to 6 eggs.  Like young chickens, young ve'a can run 
around almost as soon as they hatch, and they leave the nest immediately.  It is common to see one or 
two fuzzy, dark gray chicks being led into the grass by their watchful parents.   
 
The other Samoan rail that most people know is the manu ali'i, 
known as the Purple Swamphen.  This large and beautiful bird is a 
dark purple, with a bright red beak that extends up over the 
forehead.  It is even more widely distributed than the ve'a, 
occurring from southern Europe through Africa and all the way to 
Australia and New Zealand.  It is much less common than the ve'a 
in American Samoa, but occurs in low numbers almost 
everywhere, especially in more remote plantation areas.  This bird 
is more often heard than seen; it gives a loud screech with an 
echoing, honking quality. 
 
Like the ve'a, the manu ali'i prefers areas with thick undergrowth 
rather than true forest.  It has a very wide diet, including many insects and much plant material.  It 
sometimes gets into trouble with farmers because of its fondness for green bananas and taro tops.  
However, usually it does little damage, and repays it by eating soldier worms and other crop pests.  In 
former times, the manu ali'i was sometimes hunted, and this may be why it is so shy, usually running or 
flying off with loud screams as soon as it sees you.  Like the ve'a, it nests in thick vegetation, either on 
the ground or in a low bush.  It lays 3 or 4 eggs, and the young leave the nest to follow their parents as 
soon as they hatch. 
 
 
