 
 
NATURAL HISTORY GUIDE
 
 
50
25.  Island streams  
 
 
Tutuila Island has about 141 small streams that flow year-round along at least a portion of their main 
channel.  These streams are steep, shallow and short (most are less than a mile long).  Stream flows are 
generally low but they can flood quickly in response to heavy downpours.  But even with the high 
rainfall in our mountains (200-300 inches per year), the water drains quickly to sea or percolates into 
the porous volcanic soil to recharge our groundwater supply of drinking water. 
 
Our streams support surprisingly few species -- there are only about 8-12 
freshwater fish species, and not many more freshwater invertebrates.  The 
principal species are freshwater eels (tuna), gobies (apofu, mano'o), mountain 
bass (sesele, inato), shrimp (ulavai) and snails (sisivai).  Additional species may 
enter the lower ends of streams, but they are not restricted to a freshwater stream 
environment.  Three non-native fish species were also introduced here, probably 
in the 1970s:  mollies (fo-vai; Poecilia mexicana) and mosquitofish (Gambusia 
affinis) to control mosquitoes, and tilapia (Oreochromis mossambicus) to grow 
in aquaculture.  The impact of these alien species on the native populations is 
not known.  Additionally, we can only wonder about the impact of the alien 
marine toad (lage) that sometimes has thousands of its young tadpoles swimming in local creeks. 
 
The low number of species in our streams is in stark contrast to the many marine species living in our 
coastal marine waters (890 fish species and countless invertebrates).  Part of the explanation for this 
difference is simply that our streams are small and offer limited habitat for stream-dwelling organisms.  
But another more interesting aspect of this low diversity is:  how did any freshwater species get to 
American Samoa in the first place?  We are a small island surrounded by hundreds of miles of deep 
ocean.  Freshwater species generally cannot survive in saltwater, so how could these freshwater fish, 
shrimps and snails cross the ocean barrier to get here?   
 
The trick is that they all have a marine stage in their life cycle.  After they spawn, their newly hatched 
larvae wash out of the stream into the ocean where they drift about as marine plankton for a few weeks 
or months.  Some make their way back to a coastline where they seek a stream to live out the rest of 
their lives.  It might be expected that the few freshwater species that got to our remote islands have 
evolved over thousands of years into unique (endemic) species found nowhere else in the world, but the 
opposite is generally true.  The marine stage of these species allows a wide dispersal and continual 
genetic mixing of populations, so most of the species inhabiting our streams are widely distributed 
across the South Pacific. 
 
Because streams drain the valleys we live in, they serve as good indicators of how well we are taking 
care of the land.  Sad to say the message is not good.  Our streams once provided food and drinking 
water, but now they are treated as a place for people to throw rubbish and piggery wastes.  There have 
even been deaths in American Samoa due to leptospirosis, a bacteria from piggeries and other animals 
that pollutes many streams.  And, after a heavy rainfall, some streams turn chocolate brown with the dirt 
that erodes from the landscape.  Much of this soil erosion is due to poor land-use practices such as the 
farmer's bare-earth clearings for plantations on steep mountain slopes and the run-off from inadequately 
designed construction sites.  In the former case, the farmer not only loses the soil needed to grow his 
crops, but the eroded dirt fouls our streams and ends up in coastal waters where it harms our coral reefs.  
It does not have to be this way.  There are better ways to dispose of rubbish and to prevent erosion that 
can make streams a healthier place for fish as well as for the children who play in the streams.               
 
P.Craig, NPS 
