 
 
NATURAL HISTORY GUIDE
 
 
64
it, and a whitish-gray lower surface.  The gray surface looks smooth but is actually made up of 
thousands of very small pores, inside of which the spores are formed.  If this pore surface is lightly 
scratched, a brown line remains, and for centuries people have left messages or drawn pictures on them, 
hence their name, “artist’s conk”.   
 
Some fungi threaten our food supply.  The black leaf streak disease of bananas (lausu lui, or black 
Sigatoka) is caused by a fungus (Mycosphaerella fijiensis) that you can only see through a microscope.  
It damages the banana leaves, making the fruit small and of poor quality. Farmers have to use special 
chemicals to control this disease, which cost them time and money.  The taro leaf blight disease (lega) 
that killed most of the Samoan taro in 1993-1994 was caused by a water mold (Phytophthora 
colocasiae).  We used to call water molds ‘fungi’, but scientific tests show they are more closely related 
to certain red algae.  They have spores that swim and their mycelium is made of very different 
ingredients.  Water molds are no longer in the kingdom Fungi, but have been placed in one of the new 
kingdoms, either Protoctista or Chromista. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Banana black leaf streak  
disease (lausu lui) 
 
        Taro leaf blight (lega) 
 
 
The colorful lichens that grow on trees and rocks are actually fungi and algae living together.  This type 
of relationship is called mutualism, where both organisms benefit from the relationship.  In severe 
climates, the fungus protects the alga from damaging ultraviolet light and supplies water and dissolved 
minerals. The alga makes food for both organisms 
through photosynthesis.  In other instances, this symbiosis 
could be considered parasitism.  In American Samoa, 
many algae living on leaves or tree bark receive enough 
moisture and shade to exist without the help of a fungus.  
In fact, the fungus may actually damage or kill the algae. 
 
Fungi fill a very important role in nature by breaking 
down dead organisms into their basic elements so those 
elements can be used again to build new organisms.  This 
nutrient recycling is especially important in the tropics 
where organisms are born and die at a very fast rate.  If it 
weren't for fungi, bacteria, and other small organisms that 
eat dead plants, dead trees and bushes would soon bury us. 
 
WARNING!  Many fungi are poisonous.  Eating them can cause sickness or even death.  Don’t eat any 
mushrooms unless you are certain they are safe. 
Fred Brooks, ASCC Land Grant 
