 
 
NATURAL HISTORY GUIDE
 
 
45
23.  Banyan trees -- lifeline for Samoa's wildlife 
 
 
In the complex world of the Samoan rainforest, each of our native plants and wildlife contributes a 
unique and essential part.  Just as the beauty of a hymn would be less without the harmonies of different 
voices, so the beauty of the Samoan forests would be less if any of our plants or animals were lost.  And 
yet, as in a choir, there are a few natural “voices” that sing out above the rest.  These are the plants and 
animals most important for the harmony of Samoa's natural world.  Foremost among these are the aoa, 
or banyan trees. 
 
Banyans are fascinating plants.  Now, a lot of people don't 
think of plants as “fascinating”.  After all, they just sit 
there, right?  Well, not banyans.  Although banyans give 
life to countless animals by feeding them with their fruit, all 
banyans start out as killers -- stranglers, to be exact.  
Another name for the banyan is “strangler fig”.    
 
The aoa is a member of the fig family.  They earn the other 
part of their name by their strange way of growing.  Most 
plants, of course, sprout from seeds that have fallen to the 
ground, and grow up toward the sun.  Banyans usually do 
the opposite: they sprout from seeds that have been left by 
birds high in a tree, and grow down toward the ground.  
The seedling first anchors itself by sending roots into the little pocket of decaying leaves or moss where 
it has sprouted, then it wraps more and more roots around the tree that supports it, called the “host” tree.  
Soon the banyan's roots are spreading down the trunk, and finally they reach all the way to the ground.  
By then the fate of the host tree is sealed.  It is literally buried beneath the growing banyan -- strangled 
to death.  Eventually the body of the host tree decays away, leaving no trace behind, except sometimes a 
long hollow extending up inside the middle of the full-grown banyan.  Because banyans will start life on 
almost any type of host tree, they kill very few of any particular kind, and so are no threat to other plant 
species.  Still, they're rather...fascinating, don't you think? 
 
In Samoa, we have two different kinds of native banyan trees, both called aoa.  One kind (Ficus 
prolixa) becomes a huge tree, with an enormous spreading trunk that seems to be a twisted net of many 
smaller trunks.  This kind of banyan has green fruit.  The stronghold of this kind of banyan in American 
Samoa was the Tafuna Plain, where hundreds of the huge trees used to grow.  Today, only a small 
fraction remain.  Most have been cut down to make room for the uncontrolled development in this part 
of Tutuila.  Fortunately, a few magnificent trees still survive.  
 
The other kind of aoa (Ficus obliqua) is usually much smaller and does not have such a spreading form.  
Its trunk usually looks more “normal”, though it may have a hollow inside.  This type of banyan seems 
to favor cliffs and steep slopes, although it can also be found on flat land.  It doesn't always start life as a 
strangler, but sometimes grows up by itself.  The easiest way to recognize this kind of aoa is its fruit, 
which is orange or red when ripe. 
 
There is also an introduced kind of banyan tree in Samoa, the pulu.  This tree, originally from Asia, is 
usually planted along the coast in villages; a large one grows next to the public market in Fagatogo.  
Pulu trees differ from aoa trees by their much larger leaves and larger, fuzzy red fruit.  Although pulu 
are handsome trees that are useful for stabilizing our coasts, their fruits are not favored by wildlife, and 
so they do not play an important role in Samoa's natural symphony. 
 
