 
 
NATURAL HISTORY GUIDE
 
 
66
be collected by the thousands to make ula, are almost gone.  Meanwhile, the giant snail continues to 
thrive despite the new predator. 
 
Another example is of an invasion that is still under way -- by introduced 
birds.  The first bird introduced to American Samoa was, of course, the 
chicken (moa).  Although these occasionally nest in the forests, they are not 
truly established as wild birds here, and are no threat to our native birdlife.  
However, we do have three introduced bird species on Tutuila.  One of these is 
the manu palagi, or Red-vented Bulbul, the black bird with the crest that is 
common in nearly every village.  This species became established here in the 
1950's.  The other two species both arrived in the 1980's and there seems to be 
no name for them in Samoan.  These are the Common Myna and the Jungle 
Myna.  They look almost the same -- both are blackish brown, with big white 
patches in the wings and tail when they fly.  They are now abundant from 
Pago Pago to Leone and are spreading to the eastern and western ends of the 
island.  None of these three introduced birds has made it to Manu'a, which is 
still home to only our native Samoan birds. 
 
What's wrong with having new kinds of birds to live in our 
villages and gardens?  In some parts of the world, including 
Hawaii, both bulbuls and mynas are serious pests on fruit crops 
such as guava.  Second, they may spread the seeds of pest 
plants, like mile-a-minute vine and “Koster's curse” weed 
(Clidemia hirta), that native birds do not eat as readily.  Third, 
they may drive out native birds, like the iao or Wattled 
Honeyeater.  Although we don't know for sure that this is 
happening, there seem to be more iao around villages in Manu'a 
than on Tutuila where the introduced birds are common.  Finally, the 
introduced birds may spread diseases that will attack our native birds.  
This has happened in Hawaii.  In fact, on the main islands of Hawaii, the 
native birds have been almost completely exterminated.  Every bird you 
seen in the lowlands of Hawaii is an introduced species; the native birds 
hang on only in isolated mountain forests.  We don't want our Samoan 
birds to share this sad fate. 
 
The lesson to learn from these examples is that we must be very, very 
careful when thinking about introducing a new plant or animal to Samoa.  
Even species that seem beneficial, like the predatory snail, can have bad 
and unforeseen effects.  And once a new species is established, it is almost impossible to get rid of.  
Wisely, the Territory has established strict laws against bringing in exotic animals and any plant that 
may become a noxious weed.  Flowering plants, like Honolulu rose (Clerodendrum chinese), may look 
pretty in a garden but turn into major pests when they run wild.   
 
American Samoa's forests and wildlife are unique to all the world, having developed here over hundreds 
of thousands of years in isolation.  We must take care to preserve and protect this special heritage by 
staying alert to keep unwelcome invaders from our shores. 
 
Pepper Trail 
DMWR 
