 
 
NATURAL HISTORY GUIDE
 
 
29
14.  Manini and pone -- two favorite reef fish 
 
 
Manini and pone are two favorite food fishes found 
just about everywhere in shallow waters around the 
islands of American Samoa.  Like alogo, they belong 
to the family of fishes called surgeonfish because of 
their sharp knife blades that fit into grooves near 
their tail.  Manini and pone are rather meek fishes, 
however, and they do not seem to wield their 
weapons much. 
 
The manini (Acanthurus triostegus) is a small fish 
about 5 inches long.  Its coloration is yellow with 
vertical black bars, which looks a bit like a prisoner's 
uniform and that's why this fish is also called the convict tang. 
 
Manini often swim in large schools containing hundreds or thousands of individuals.  There are two 
good reasons for this schooling behavior -- it helps them escape predators and it also helps them get 
access to food.  First, when a large fish attacks a school of manini, the manini scatter in all directions 
like a shotgun blast.  This commotion momentarily confuses the predator and the manini get away. Each 
manini thus has a better chance of not getting eaten if it stays in a group. 
 
The manini also cleverly use their schooling 
behavior to get food.  They like to feed on the 
thin green algae turf that grows on reef rocks, 
but these algae patches are usually guarded 
fiercely by alogo surgeonfish and 
damselfishes (tu'u'u) who are nasty to 
intruders. 
 
Just the sight of a manini gets them livid with 
rage.  A single manini would not stand a 
chance to get by these guards, but a large 
group of manini can succeed.  The alogo and 
damselfishes are simply overwhelmed when 
hundreds of manini descend into their 
territory to feed.  While the alogo futilely 
chases one manini away, a hundred others are gobbling up its garden. 
 
Manini spawning is a spectacular event.  When conditions are right, thousands will assemble to spawn 
at a particular time and place.  They often spawn in or near the reef channel (ava) at dusk when the tide 
is high.  Their behavior and coloration are noticeably different at this time, as they swim around in a 
agitated fashion and change color to white with wider black bars.  This seething mass of fish mills about 
until they can't take the excitement any longer.  A group of them will suddenly burst upwards in the 
water column, spawn, and return to the seafloor again, all in a split second.  Although this happens fast, 
you can tell that the fish actually spawned because the milt expelled by the male fish looks like a puff of 
smoke from a gun.  When the spawning action really gets going, it looks like an underwater version of 
popcorn popping. 
 
