 
 
NATURAL HISTORY GUIDE
 
 
76
beaks of the two birds:  the Cardinal Honeyeater has a very delicate, sharp beak that is perfect for 
slipping into flowers but not so good for grabbing big bugs.  The beak of the Wattled Honeyeater is 
sturdier, more all-purpose:  good both for flowers and insects. 
 
Perhaps because of its love of flowers, the segasegamau'u seems happy to live close to people, in 
gardens and plantations.  Although much less common than the iao in the forest, it is the honeyeater that 
you're likely to see around villages.  Around villages on Tutuila, that is;  surprisingly, the 
segasegamau'u doesn't occur on any of the islands of Manu'a.  Outside of American Samoa, the species 
is found in western Samoa, Vanuatu, and the Solomon Islands, and very close relatives occur in 
Micronesia and Fiji. 
 
The nest of the Cardinal Honeyeater is a beautiful, delicate cup of fine grass fibers, often decorated with 
moss.  It may be placed high in a tree or almost on the ground in thick foliage.  Four to five tiny eggs are 
laid.  The segasegmau'u seems to nest in all months of the year. 
   
There used to be a third kind of honeyeater on Tutuila, the very large, blackish ma'oma'o or mao 
(Gymnomyza samoensis).  This is a real mystery bird.  Larger than a fuia (Samoan Starling), with loud 
wailing calls, the ma'oma'o is remembered by some of the elders of Tutuila, 
and was collected by scientists here in the 1920s.  However, except for a 
couple of possible sightings in the 1960s and 1970s, it has never been seen 
since.  The ma'oma'o is now found only in the remote mountains of 'Upolu 
and Savai'i, where it is rare and little known.  We will probably never know 
if this bird was once an important part of our forests, or if it occurred here 
only as a rare visitor from western Samoa.  According to legends, hearing 
the wails and screams of the ma'oma'o around a village meant that 
misfortune or a death was about to happen.  Sadly, this prophecy seems to 
have come true for the ma'oma'o itself, which is now in danger of the 
greatest misfortune -- extinction. 
 
 
 
 
Pepper Trail 
DMWR  
