 
 
NATURAL HISTORY GUIDE
 
 
36
18.  Baby turtles:  look but don't touch! 
 
 
Baby sea turtles.  They’re so neat -- 
perfectly formed miniatures, all racing 
down the beach together to get into the 
water.  Kids think they’re cute and they 
want to keep them as pets, and plenty of 
parents think baby turtles make great pets.  
After all, they don’t bark or fight, and 
they’re so tiny so they don’t take up much 
space.  They don’t eat much, either. 
 
Also, some people in American Samoa 
believe that when a nest of turtles hatches 
and all the babies run to the sea, their 
mothers are waiting out on the reef to eat 
them!  Because of this misguided belief, 
some people collect baby turtles and keep them at home or release them on a different beach.  But the 
very best thing we can do for baby turtles is:  LEAVE THEM ALONE! 
 
Many years of scientific research on sea turtles have taught us that mother turtles do not eat their babies.  
Adult turtles eat mostly seagrass, algae (seaweed), and sea sponges (the living kind, NOT the kitchen 
kind).  In fact, after the female turtle has laid eggs (sometimes two or three times in the space of a few 
weeks), she goes back out to the sea and leaves the area.  For example, after nesting at Rose Atoll, some 
of American Samoa's green sea turtles swam to Fiji  – over 800 miles away!  So, those of you with good 
intentions out there, rest assured that mom will not be eating her babies, and you do not need to collect 
the baby turtles from the beach to save them from her. 
 
It is true that baby turtles do have predators, such as large fishes and sharks.  Nature provides the turtles 
with some protection however:  (1) most turtles hatch at night when predators might have difficulty 
seeing them, (2) baby turtles are dark-colored, 
and this “cryptic coloration” enables them to be 
camouflaged as they swim over the reef, (3) 
female turtles can lay over 100 eggs in a single 
nest — when this many turtles hatch at the same 
time, a big jack (ulua) or shark (malie) can’t 
possibly catch and eat all of them, so some have a 
chance to hide in the reef.  This is called 
“predator swamping” and is common among 
reptiles (lizards, snakes, turtles, etc.).  For this 
reason it is a bad idea to take “just a few” baby 
turtles away, and release them later.  The 
“predator swamping” effect is lost and those baby 
turtles will probably end up as some fish's lunch. 
 
A critical reason to leave baby turtles on the beach is that THAT EXACT BEACH is very important to 
them.  Baby turtles remember or “imprint on” the beach where they hatched.  Like many animals, turtles 
have little natural magnets in their brains that allow them to home-in on their native beach.  Years later 
when it’s time for them to reproduce, adult turtles, with their internal “homing devices”, will seek that 
same beach.  If hatchling turtles are removed from their home beaches and kept in someone’s bathtub or 
