 
 
NATURAL HISTORY GUIDE
 
 
27
13. The alogo surgeonfish -- ruler of the reeftop 
 
 
American Samoa's coral reefs are truly a wonder of nature.  Our sea is home to a very diverse and 
colorful assemblage of plants and animals.  Some 890 species of fish occur here, which is about twice 
the number of marine fish species found in Hawaii. 
 
At first glance, the reef seems to be an exotic panorama 
of mass confusion, complete with bizarre shapes of fish 
painted in psychedelic colors.  It's like looking into an 
overstocked aquarium.  But as you frequent the reef more 
often, you begin to notice some structure to the 
confusion.  Each species is generally found only in 
certain habitats such as shallow reef flats, sandy bottom 
areas, or deeper waters. 
 
Many individual fish even take up permanent residence at 
a particular site rather than roam around.  One particular 
fish I watched stayed at the same coral block for 3 years (it had a unique markings on its body, so I 
could easily identify it).  That coral block was home.   
 
Such stay-at-home behavior is actually quite common among coral reef fishes.  One abundant species on 
our reefs that does this is the alogo, also known as the blue-lined surgeonfish (Acanthurus lineatus) 
because of its knife-like blade located near its tail.  The blade is usually not visible because it is folded 
away into a groove in the fish's skin.  It is a bit poisonous, and careless handling of the fish may cause a 
puncture and painful swelling in your hand. 
 
The alogo grows about 8 inches long and 
weighs half a pound.  It is a very 
attractive fish, with bold yellow, blue, 
and black horizontal lines on its sides, 
although its basic color pattern can be 
swiftly altered depending on the alogo's 
mood.  For example, when the alogo 
becomes aggressive and chases another 
fish, its face and fins darken and it looks 
angry (to me at least). 
 
The alogo lives in the foamy surge zone 
where the waves crash against the reef.  
This is not an easy place to live, but the 
alogo is adept at it.  When a really rough 
wave hits, the alogo darts down into a 
hole or over the reef edge into the safety 
of deeper water.  
 
Like a lot of other reef fish, the alogo is a territorial animal, which means that it dwells at a particular 
patch of reef and protects that site from all other fish.  The territory of each alogo measures about 5 x 5 
feet.  There it feeds on the thin film of plant material (algae) that covers the reeftop and appears as a 
greenish grassy turf.  Because of their territorial nature, the alogo space themselves evenly across the 
Alogo in black-fin coloration as they compete for a new 
territory.  Note the substrate – that’s prime real estate 
with a good crop of turf algae that the alogo eat.  
