 
 
NATURAL HISTORY GUIDE
 
 
62
microfilariae circulating in your blood, thus preventing their further spread by mosquitoes.  The cycle of 
infection can be broken if the number of people carrying this disease is significantly reduced. 
 
Dengue fever is also transmitted by mosquitoes.  Dengue is a viral disease that is rapidly expanding in 
tropical and subtropical areas of the world.  It’s not native to American Samoa but is periodically 
brought here by travelers from other infected areas.  It then gets spread around primarily by the daytime-
biting Aedes polynesiensis and Ae. aegypti mosquitoes.  This virus is present in the mosquito’s saliva, so 
it is injected directly into you when an infected mosquito bites you.  Symptoms range from mild fevers 
to severe and potentially life-threatening illness.  No vaccine is available yet. 
 
A key point to emphasize here is that filariasis and dengue cannot be spread 
directly from person to person.  An intermediate host, the mosquito, is 
required to transmit the disease. 
 
Three other mosquito-borne diseases are worth mentioning.  The most serious 
one, malaria, does not occur in American Samoa.  It is found in the western 
region of the South Pacific, but the particular species of mosquito that 
transmits malaria (the Anopheles mosquito) does not occur this far east.  A 
different type of malaria does occur here, but it infects only birds (avian malaria).  The birds don’t seem 
to be greatly affected by it however, perhaps because they’ve adapted to it over a long period of time.  
Similarly, there is a mosquito-borne parasitic nematode on island that affects dogs (heartworm). 
 
Will tourists to American Samoa pick up these diseases?  Not too likely.  First, dengue is usually not 
present here, only when an infected traveler brings the disease here.  Second, filariasis probably requires 
multiple bites by specific mosquito species, and probably only a small percent of this species actually 
carries the disease at any given time. 
 
Scientists predict that we may see an increase in such diseases due to global warming and climate 
change.  Although exact mechanisms are not known, many pathogens are sensitive to temperature; for 
example, growth, reproduction, and biting rates of insects all increase with higher temperatures.  Global 
warming appears to be triggering a number of disease epidemics worldwide, involving a diversity of 
pathogens (viruses, bacteria, fungi, parasites) and a wide range of hosts (humans, corals, oysters, 
terrestrial plants, birds).   
 
There are several basic measures that can be taken to reduce mosquito-borne diseases: 
 
1. Find their breeding sites.  Mosquitoes require water to complete their life cycle, so removing 
pockets of standing water around your house will help reduce their numbers.  Survey your yard and 
eliminate areas where water can collect, such as discarded tires, buckets, coconut shells, saimin bowls, 
aluminum cans, cemetery urns, clogged roof gutters, etc.  Drill holes in the bottom of large containers 
so that the water does not accumulate in them, or cover large objects like rain barrels with screening.  
2.  Avoid getting bitten.  When the mosquitoes are out, wear long-sleeved shirts and long-pants.  Use 
repellants and insecticides safely.  Repair window screens on your house, and if needed, sleep under 
mosquito net tents while resting during the day and night. 
3. Take filariasis medicine.  Remember, you can be infected with the filariasis worm and not have 
symptoms.  The filariasis medicine is free, so take it every year to break the cycle.  If the health 
workers miss coming to your house each year, go to the hospital and ask for the medicine. 
4. Be thankful for the swiftlets (pe’ape’a).  They eat mosquitoes (and other flying insects). 
 
P.Craig, NPS 
