 
 
NATURAL HISTORY GUIDE
 
 
52
 
 
 
Neritina variegata 
Clithon corona 
Septaria sanguisuga 
 
The other type of shell is the cap-like Septaria species.  It has no visible operculum and therefore the 
snail cannot retract into its shell.  Instead it clamps to rocks with its muscular foot, making it very hard 
to detach.  This is useful when you live in turbulent rapids or on steep walls.  Besides these two 
differences, you may also notice variations in shell color, pattern and texture.  They range from light to 
very dark brown with zigzag, wavy, or straight lines, or none at all.  They may be smooth and shiny or 
grooved and wrinkled.  Some even have horns. 
 
A small turret shaped snail (Melanoides sp.) can also be found near the edge of streams in gravel and 
mud.  This species is found throughout the Pacific.  
 
Shrimp.  Probably the most versatile freshwater species are 
the shrimp.  American Samoa is home to two families, 
Atyidae and Palaemonidae, each with 4-5 species.  The 
palaemonid Macrobrachium shrimp are possibly the most 
well known and can be easily seen in the lower to middle 
reaches of our streams.  They are easy to identify by their 
large pincers.  When wading through pools and shallow runs, 
watch for these shrimp as they make a quick retreat at your 
approach.  Although shy, they will reappear if you keep still.  
These scavengers feed on both plant and animal material.  
They may also dislodge Neritina and Corona snails from 
rocks, open them up and devour them. 
 
Atyidae shrimp can be found throughout many clean streams.  
Some are excellent climbers and congregate in the lee of 
rocks and boulders of fast flowing streams.  Others seek a 
quiet place in the vegetation and roots of plants near a stream 
edge where flow is slow.  These shrimp exhibit distinct 
feeding behaviors.  In fast flowing water they orient 
themselves in the direction of the current and spread the fine 
brushes on their front legs to form upturned umbrellas. They 
use these to filter food particles carried in the current and 
then push them into their mouth.  In slower moving water 
they use their brushes to pluck food items from plants and gravel. 
 
Stream insects.  Although some insects are common inhabitants in streams around the world, they are 
not well-represented on our small oceanic islands.  Few of the terrestrial insects we see in American 
Samoa have an aquatic stage in their life cycle (some exceptions being a few dragonflies, damselflies, 
midges, mayflies, and beetles). 
 
K. van Houte-Howes 
ASCC Land Grant 
