 
 
NATURAL HISTORY GUIDE
 
 
59
31. The bugs in your house 
 
 
There will always be some bugs in your house, so relax a little and get used to them.  Before you know 
it, you will be sweeping termite droppings off your kitchen counter as if you didn’t have a care in the 
world.  Several common household insects (beetles, moths, termites, cockroaches, wasps, ants) and 
other arthropods (centipedes, millipedes, spiders) are described below. 
 
Centipede (atualoa).  The large, 6-inch brown centipede (Scolopendra 
subspinipes) is well known locally but not commonly seen.  It is quite fast 
and scary looking as it searches for things to eat at night.  Occasionally 
someone gets bitten and it can be extremely painful.  The local Emergency 
Medical Services responds to a few calls each month, particularly after a 
lot of rainfall has driven the atualoa to higher grounds.  People vary in 
their response to a bite, but for most, there is not much that can be done 
about it, and the pain will usually lessen in a few hours. 
 
Millipedes (anufesaina).  Millipedes are neither insects nor worms but a different 
kind of arthropod.  They differ from centipedes in being slower, rounder and in 
having two pairs of little legs per body segment.  Our local millipedes grow up to 
about two inches long.  They are active at night and feed primarily on rotting 
wood and leaves.  They are generally harmless and curl up when threatened.  
However, anufesaina have defensive glands along the sides of their body that 
can produce foul and sometimes poisonous secretions, and they can cause a 
burn-like pain on your skin if you squash one.  
 
Cockroaches (moga moga).  At least give cockroaches some credit for 
inhabiting earth millions of years before we humans ever showed up.  
Nonetheless, it is their fate to be despised insects associated with filth.  
They are extremely hardy scavengers that will eat almost anything.  One 
species living here is the large non-native American cockroach, 
Periplaneta americana.  Their egg cases look like brown beans, each 
containing 10-20 eggs that hatch in 5-7 weeks.  Their total life span is 
probably 2 years or so.  Cockroaches are nocturnal, so if they are also seen 
during daytime, the house is probably heavily infested. 
 
Ensign wasps.  A wasp yes, but a good one, so don’t swat it.  You’ll occasionally 
see these spider-like black insects flying around the house.  They look like they 
were built out of parts that don’t quite match up.  There’s a large head, and a boxy 
middle part (thorax), followed by a tiny posterior (abdomen) hanging off the back 
that bobs up and down like a flag being waved (the “ensign”).  These wasps don’t 
sting people.  Instead they use their “stinger” to lay their eggs inside cockroach 
egg cases.  Before the young cockroaches can emerge from the case, the wasp eggs hatch first and eat 
all the cockroach eggs.  All in all, these little “black flag” wasps probably kill a lot more cockroaches 
than we ever could with our spray-can insecticides. 
 
Termites.  There are usually two times when we notice termites in the house.  The 
first is when a large swarm of them suddenly appears fluttering around a light bulb 
in the evening.  These are male and female termites in love.  What identifies them as 
termites is their large, equal-size pair of wings, and that they shed their wings after 
their nuptial flight.  The second time we notice them is when we see the daily piles 
