 
 
NATURAL HISTORY GUIDE
 
 
26
12.  S h a r k s 
 
 
We are fortunate not to have much of a “shark problem” in American Samoa.  Based on conversations 
with long-time residents here, it appears that there have been very few shark attacks in the Territory and 
probably no fatalities here in the past 30 years.  The few injuries that have occurred were usually related 
to fishing activities, and records from the hospital's Emergency Medical Services concur with this.  
EMS has responded to only one or two shark incidents in recent memory – one was a somewhat 
humorous account of two fishermen trying to land a shark in their boat.  The first fisherman brought the 
shark up to the side of the boat so that his partner could club it, but his partner missed.  The shark then 
reared up and bit the first fisherman, who then got mad and clubbed his partner for missing the shark. 
 
The sharks (malie) living in our nearshore 
waters are generally not dangerous to 
swimmers or divers.  The most commonly 
seen species are the blacktip reef shark 
(Carcharhinus melanopterus) and the 
whitetip reef shark (Triaenodon obesus).  
These are not large sharks, usually about 4-
5 feet in length, although everyone swears 
that the one they saw was bigger.  They 
feed on fish and shellfish.  The whitetip has 
an unusual habit of resting occasionally on the seafloor during the daytime.  These two shark species are 
usually not aggressive but they may swim close by to see who's in their area.  But both are attracted to 
wounded and bleeding fish, which accounts for several shark encounters with divers who had tied 
speared fish around their waists.  Need it be suggested that this is not a smart thing to do? 
 
The blacktip is easily frightened away, but on rare occasions small blacktips will sometimes startle a 
person by swimming directly at them.  They look like a little torpedo coming straight at you, but other 
than your brief panic attack, no harm is done.  Another quirk of the adult blacktip is that, at night, it may 
charge at a diver's flashlight if the light shines on them for too long. 
 
Sightings of more dangerous sharks in our nearshore waters are rare, but over the years, a few tiger 
sharks have been seen or caught around Tutuila.  Also, hammerhead sharks are known to swim into 
Pago Pago Harbor, where some give birth to young and others are perhaps attracted there by the cannery 
wastes.  The large but non-dangerous whale shark has also seen near Taema Bank and a juvenile whale 
shark (4.1 m total length) washed up 
on Aunu’u island in 1989. 
 
So, yes indeed we have sharks in our 
shoreline waters, but most are not of 
serious concern.  Yet, someplace deep 
in our brain yells Danger! whenever 
we see one.  But it is still very exciting 
to see a shark swim by.  Our heart rate 
jumps, but then the shark is quickly 
gone, and our only thought is wow, 
did you see that? 
 
P.Craig, NPS 
