 
 
NATURAL HISTORY GUIDE
 
 
25
11.  Master of disguise:  the octopus (fe’e) 
 
 
Locked in eye contact, we each wondered what the other was going to 
do.  The octopus tried to become invisible by changing its color, but I 
could still see his eyes, and he knew it.  Then a small distracting cloud 
of inky smoke appeared in his direction and he was gone. 
 
There’s no other reef animal quite like the octopus (fe’e).  Although it 
looks like a large, unprotected meal for some big fish, it is hardly 
defenseless.  The octopus is the “masters of disguise” for its superb ability to become invisible by 
changing the color and texture of its skin to match its surroundings.  With its good eyesight and well-
developed brain, it is probably the most intelligent of all invertebrates.  And if camouflage and quick 
wits don’t suffice, it can either squeeze down very small holes or escape by jet propulsion, leaving its 
calling card, an inky cloud that acts as a decoy or smoke screen to momentarily confuse a predator while 
the octopus vanishes. 
 
The octopus commonly seen locally is the reef octopus, Octopus cyanea, which is mottled red-brown in 
color with a large spot beneath each eye.  It typically weighs 2-3 lbs.  It is a mollusk, related to squid, 
snails, clams, but the octopus lacks a shell and has eight strong arms covered with suckers.  It breathes 
by sucking water into its mantle cavity and over its gills; it then expels the water through its funnel.  If 
threatened by a predator, it can expel this water forcefully, causing it to jet away. 
 
Fe’e feed on crustaceans (crabs, shrimps, lobsters) and mollusks (cowry snails) by creeping up on them.  
After pouncing on an unsuspecting prey, the octopus holds it tightly with its suckers until it can bite the 
animal with its parrot-like beak and inject a toxin to paralyze the prey.  It may take its meal back to the 
safety of its den (the reef hole it calls home), and that’s why there are often telltale bits of shells around 
an octopus den.  Mating occurs year-round.  The female lays her eggs inside her den and cares for them 
until they hatch.  She then dies.  When the eggs hatch, out pop miniature octopuses that are dispersed by 
water currents until they settle back onto the reef. 
 
The octopus is a favorite food of local fishermen who often check particular holes on the reef known to 
be good den sites for fe’e.  Octopus are taken by hand or spear and they account for about 5-10% of all 
the fish and invertebrates harvested on our reefs.  The drooping, pale gray octopus we see hung out for 
sale along the roadside is a ghoulish remnant of this crafty 
animal. 
 
The octopus is also caught by a traditional lure made of a 
large cowry shell that resembles a rat (isumu).  That came 
about due to an event that happened long ago, as related in 
the Samoan legend about the octopus and the rat.  It all 
started with a sightseeing canoe trip on the ocean by an 
owl, a snail and a rat.  Their canoe started to sink, so the owl escaped by flying away, the snail sank with 
the canoe to the bottom of the ocean (goto uga), and the rat tried to swim to shore but he had a long way 
to go.  He saw an octopus and called for help.  The octopus agreed and swam to shore with the rat on his 
head.  When they got to shore, the rat jumped off and thanked the octopus for saving his life and said 
that he left a little present on the octopus’s head.  When the octopus realized that there was a rat 
dropping on his head, he became extremely angry and told the rat, if I ever see you again, I’ll kill you.  
To this day, the octopus is mad about this and is still looking for the rat. 
 
P.Craig, NPS 
