 
 
NATURAL HISTORY GUIDE
 
 
65
34.  Pest invaders are here 
 
 
The history of life on islands is a 
story of invasions.  Ever since the 
high islands of American Samoa 
rose out of the sea as barren piles of 
volcanic rock, living things have 
been making the long and dangerous 
journey across the Pacific to reach 
this new land.  Until a few thousand 
years ago, every plant, insect, and 
bird that lived on our islands was the descendant of a lucky adventurer that had crossed hundreds or 
thousands of miles of open ocean to establish a new colony here.  
 
The first Samoans were also such lucky adventurers, making the perilous voyage here in their 
journeying canoes.  But their arrival marked the beginning of a new way for plants and animals to reach 
our islands -- being carried here, either by accident or on purpose, by people.  Ever since then, the 
environment of American Samoa has changed tremendously.   
 
Some of these changes may have benefited some wildlife species.  For example, the introduction several 
important food plants such as breadfruit and bananas provide a year-round source of food for some birds 
and fruit bats, rather than seasonally like some native plants that are eaten by wildlife.  Other changes 
brought by the Polynesians were harmful to the environment -- for example, the introduction of rats 
(isumu).  And since the arrival of Europeans and Americans, the rate of introduction of new plants and 
animals to American Samoa has increased tremendously.  The results have often been disastrous. 
 
Some plants brought by the Polynesians “escaped” to spread widely through the natural forest such as ifi 
and nonu trees.  More recently, about 250 alien plant species (many of them weeds) have also become 
established in American Samoa and some of these threaten our native forest.  One that is familiar to 
everyone is the “mile-a-minute” vine, or fuesaina (Mikania micrantha).  This was introduced by 
accident, sometime before 1924.  It is now a major pest in plantations and forests, and has spread 
tremendously following tropical cyclones in the early 1990s.  The vine needs sunlight for its very fast 
growth, and so doesn't do well inside the shade of the mature forest.  The cyclones, however, opened up 
the forests to sunlight by knocking down many trees and breaking off the tops of thousands more.  
Vines like these can form layers several feet thick that can choke the seedlings of native trees and slow 
the recovery of our forests from the damage of the cyclones. 
 
Another well-known pest to agriculture is the giant African 
snail (sisi aferika, Achatina fulica).  This was reportedly 
introduced to the Pacific when the governor of Tahiti 
imported them to satisfy the hunger of his mistress for 
escargot, or edible snails.  Bad, bad idea -- not only were the 
snails not edible, but they quickly spread throughout 
Polynesia, and became a major pest of taro and other crops. 
 
 
Unfortunately, the story does not end there.  In the hopes to 
control the giant snails, a predatory snail (Euglandina rosea) native to Florida was deliberately 
introduced here in 1980.  The idea was that this new snail -- the one with the long pinkish shell -- would 
kill off all the giant snails.  Instead, it has driven the native land snails of the Pacific islands to the edge 
of extinction.  Most of the native snails of Tahiti are now extinct, and the Samoan snails, which used to 
