 
 
NATURAL HISTORY GUIDE
 
 
71
37.  The Pacific Pigeon (lupe), Samoa's royal bird 
 
 
The lupe, or Pacific Pigeon, is the king of Samoa's birds and in many ways it is the most culturally 
important bird in our islands.  It is our largest forest bird and is the only one able to feed on, and spread, 
the large seeds of some of our most important rainforest trees.  Its cultural significance is revealed by 
the many Samoan proverbs that relate to the lupe and the art of lupe-hunting.  The importance of lupe is 
also shown by the amazing tia seulupe (star-mounds) which are massive stone platforms built by the 
ancient Samoans, which served at least partly as pigeon-trapping sites. 
 
 
The lupe is a member of a group of birds called the 
imperial pigeons because of their large size and 
dignified appearance.  Most imperial pigeons live in 
the islands of the Pacific, although a few reach the 
mainland of Asia and one occurs in Australia.  
These birds are closely related to the much smaller 
fruit-doves, like the manutagi (Purple-capped Fruit 
Dove) but are only distantly related to the common 
pigeon that waddles around the cities of the world.  
The lupe is found from the islands north of New 
Guinea east through Fiji, Tonga, Samoa, Niue, and 
the Cook Islands.  Interestingly, throughout most of 
this wide range, it is usually found on small islands 
and atolls, not on large 'high islands'.  This is most striking in Fiji, where lupe are found on the small 
islands of the Lau group, but not on the large islands of Vanua Levu, Viti Levu or Taveuni.  A closely 
related imperial pigeon replaces the lupe on those high islands. 
 
Lupe are a common sight in forested areas of American Samoa and can be seen flying high over villages 
or bays.  They even visit moso'oi and poumuli trees near houses, if those houses are not too far from 
forests.  Even when not seen, they announce their presence with easy to hear calls:  a low, rising and 
falling moo like that of a cow, or a loud, rolling prrrrrhhh.  One of the benefits of American Samoa's ban 
on hunting lupe (and pe'a) after the cyclones in the early 1990s is that they become less scared of 
people, giving us better chances to see and appreciate these spectacular birds. 
 
Their nests are hard to find.  During all our time in the forests, we have seen only a few.  We have also 
seen evidence of nest-building (for example, lupe flying with sticks in their bills) on several other 
occasions.  All these observations were during the months of January through September.  Lupe nests 
are open platforms of twigs, with no lining.  They are usually placed in dense clumps of leaves high up 
in trees, making them very hard to see. 
 
These birds lay only a single white egg.  Both parents help incubate the egg and feed the chick once it 
hatches.  All members of the pigeon family have an amazing ability:  they feed their young a sort of 
“milk”.  This is a nutritious liquid that is a combination of digested food and other substances secreted 
by special glands in the bird's digestive system.  Both male and female pigeons make this milk, so both 
parents take an equal part in feeding the young.  Information from related species of imperial pigeons 
suggests that lupe eggs take about 27 days to hatch, and that the young spend about 28 days in the nest 
after hatching.  It seems like lupe could nest more than once a year, but most young birds are seen from 
July to August, so most nesting probably occurs at just one time each year. 
 
Lupe eat many different rainforest foods, and not just fruits from favored trees like atone, ma'ali, malili, 
mamala, mamalava, moso'oi or aoa.  They also eat fruits from vines such as mamalupe (pigeon's 
