 
 
NATURAL HISTORY GUIDE
 
 
24
10.  Giant clams (faisua) 
 
 
It's always a pleasure to see one of these beauties on the reef.  Giant clams (faisua) are large, colorful 
and, surprisingly, they are part animal and part “plant”.  That's because giant clams, like corals, have 
plant-like cells (zooxanthellae) in their tissues that produce free food for the clams.  When a clam opens 
its shell and spreads out its pretty mantle, it exposes these solar panels of zooxanthellae to the sun to 
make food, like a plant unfolding its leaves. 
At the same time, the clam also gets some food by 
drawing water through its siphon and filtering out any 
tiny food particles (zooplankton).  Perhaps that's why 
giant clams grow so large – they have two very different 
ways to get food. 
 
We have two native species of giant clams in our local 
waters, Tridacna maxima and T. squamosa, which look 
fairly similar.  They grow to about 12-15 inches in shell 
length, although most found today are smaller because the 
larger ones have been over-harvested.  The largest and 
most famous species of giant clam (T. gigas), which 
grows as big as a large suitcase, is not native here but has 
been recently imported.  Over the past 15 years, 
mariculture efforts by DMWR have introduced T. gigas and T. derasa, and re-introduced Hippopus 
hippopus, a shallow-water species that was formerly present. 
 
Because giant clams need sunlight, they inhabit shallow, clear waters down to about 60 feet deep.  They 
grow very slowly; one local clam was 18 years old.  They spawn repeatedly over their life span and 
release millions of eggs each time they spawn, but most young clams do not survive, so the adults have 
to live a long time and spawn many times to insure that the population survives.  Larval clams swim in 
the water for about a week, then settle permanently onto the reef to grow. 
 
The clams are a favorite food item throughout the South Pacific and their accessibility in shallow waters 
and slow growth make them susceptible to overfishing.  That is very much the case in American Samoa, 
where few remain on many of our reefs near populated areas.  There is a growing concern that our 
population of giant clams may be getting too few and far between to spawn successfully.   
 
Partly for that reason, there has been an interest in growing these clams in hatcheries to supply markets 
for food and the aquarium trade.  DMWR has operated a hatchery here for many years and tried to 
encourage local production by supplying small clams for local 'farmers' to grow them on their reefs.  
That effort has met with limited success for several reasons.  Considerable dedication is needed because 
it may take several years to grow the clams to a commercial size, and the clams have to be protected 
from poachers and predators.  And there are always fa'alavelave events that call for contributions of 
giant clams if anyone has some.  In general, giant clam mariculture here has usually supplemented 
family needs rather than create a commercial business.  Periodically, the idea of raising the clams to a 
small size for the aquarium trade is talked about as a possible market. 
 
Harvest regulations in American Samoa (in 2005) are:  giant clams taken for 
personal consumption must be at least 6 inches in shell length, or if sold, a 
license is required and giant clams must be at least 7 inches in shell length and 
sold with the clam still in its shell.  
P.Craig, NPS  
