 
 
NATURAL HISTORY GUIDE
 
 
47
24.  Natural foods for wildlife 
 
 
An animal's place in its environment is determined, more than anything else, by what it eats.  By 
studying what the birds and bats of American Samoa eat, and when those different foods are available, 
we are better able to develop plans to manage and conserve our wildlife and to help these animals in a 
crisis, such as after a tropical cyclone. 
 
Most animals can be grouped by what and how many kinds of foods they eat.  Animals that eat many 
different things are called generalists, while those that eat only one or a few foods are called specialists.  
True specialization is often a two-way dependency:  an animal depends on a plant for food, and the 
plant depends on that animal to help it disperse its seeds.  On remote islands like American Samoa, there 
is often not that much of any one kind of food, and cyclones can cause serious shortages of the foods 
that are available, so it is usually not a good idea for either a plant or an animal to rely on only one other 
creature.  We have few bird or bat species that are specialists in American Samoa. 
 
The technical word for the generalist, “omnivore”, literally means “eats everything”.  Humans probably 
have the broadest diet of any animal -- we happily eat meat, leaves, seeds, fruit, and fungus -- not to 
mention Bongos.  Animals that are most likely to survive in new environments, like when they first 
arrived on Tutuila, are often omnivores.  A good example is the rat (isumu), which can eat fruit, eggs, 
crabs, fungi and probably many other things.  
 
“Carnivores” are those species that eat almost exclusively other animals.  We usually think of 
carnivores as fierce hunters, like wolves or lions, but actually any animal that eats other animals is a 
carnivore.  The Barn Owl, or lulu, is the only Samoan animal that hunts other birds and mammals, but 
we have lots of other carnivores, including all our fish-eating birds and even our many animals that eat 
insects. 
 
“Herbivore” is a description of those animals that eat only plants.  This is a very general term, so it is 
better to specify what part of a plant is eaten, whether leaves, fruits, or nectar.  Each kind of animal 
usually is good at eating only one, or at most two, of these parts of a plant, because they are so different.  
For example, to rely on leaves, you need strong teeth to grind up the tough fibers, and a big stomach to 
process all that material.  Cows and horses are well equipped for the job.  At the other extreme, to rely 
on nectar (the sweet liquid inside of flowers), you need to be 
able to zip between lots of flowers and reach inside to suck up 
the small amount of juice in each one.  Nectar-feeders tend to be 
small and energetic, with long beaks or tongues to reach inside 
flowers.  Finally, to eat fruit, you need to be able to travel long 
distances, since trees with fruit are often hard to find. 
 
There are no native Samoan animals that are specialized for 
eating leaves (except insects and snails).  However, leaves are 
regular parts of the diet of fruit bats (pe'a) and Pacific Pigeon 
(lupe). Perhaps the leaves contain a nutrient that can't be found 
in fruit, or maybe they help to fill up a hungry animal when 
there is little other food available. 
 
Nectar is a very important food for many of our local animals.  
The beautiful red and black Cardinal Honeyeater (segasegamau'u) is our most specialized nectar-eater.  
Its long bill and tongue enable it to reach deep into flowers, and its small size allows it to perch on even 
the tiniest twigs to reach the blossoms.  Other birds that eat lots of nectar are the Wattled Honeyeater 
