 
 
NATURAL HISTORY GUIDE
 
 
31
15.  Old fish caught locally 
 
 
This is hard to believe -- an 18 year old alogo was caught in American Samoa.  That's old enough to get 
a drivers license.  
 
We're talking about the alogo, also known as the blue-lined surgeonfish Acanthurus lineatus.  Nothing 
unusual about its size -- it was the typical 8-inch alogo you see in the stores.  And I ate it.  All that 
remained were the little bones that scientists use to determine the age of the fish.  These bones, when 
looked at under a microscope, have concentric circles, one for each year, just like tree rings.  You just 
count the rings and that's how old the fish is. 
 
What's even more astonishing is that an alogo caught in 
Australia's Great Barrier Reef was 44 years old.  I am not 
kidding.  There were also other alogo in the Australian 
sample that were 20-40 years old, so the record age of 44 is 
believable.  These old fish were not unusually large, just 
the standard size alogo. 
 
It turns out that this is not unusual for coral reef fish.  
Recent studies show that several other species of 
surgeonfish (pone), unicornfish (ume), groupers (gatala) and snappers (mu) can also live up to 20-40 
years.  These findings are beginning to reshape our understanding about the ecology of coral reef fishes 
and their vulnerability to overfishing.  The occurrence of many long-lived fish in a population indicates 
that the coral reef fish community is quite stable, with a low replacement of individual fish.  Once a 
young fish gets to the reef, it may be there for decades. 
 
Why would these fish live so long?  The answer provides some key information about the environment 
that the fish live in.  Fish typically exhibit this type of life cycle (long life span and repeat spawning) 
when few of their young survive.  That's certainly the case for coral reef fish – their thousands of eggs 
and larvae drift around with the ocean currents for weeks or months.  Very few of them make it back to 
the reefs.  So, if all their young usually die, the adult fish need to live a long time and spawn repeatedly 
to make sure that at least some young survive.  If the adults lived 
only a short time, the population might disappear altogether. 
 
Every so often however, during years when the ocean currents and 
conditions are just right, massive numbers of young fish survive and 
appear on our reefs, like pala'ia (young pone surgeonfish) or i'asina 
(young goatfish). 
 
While this is all very interesting of course, there is an important take-
home message.  It is easy to overfish populations with these life 
history characteristics.  Having a long life span and spawning 
repeatedly may be a successful strategy under natural conditions, but 
it also makes these fish extra vulnerable to overfishing.  That's 
because fishermen tend to harvest the larger (older) fish in the 
population.  Under heavy fishing pressure, all the old fish may be 
taken, leaving only the smaller, younger fish.  That would put the 
population in a very precarious situation, because the younger fish 
left may not yet be old enough to spawn. 
 
I’asina in a basket trap (enu) 
