ROSE ATOLL, AMERICAN SOMOA. 77 ,
of Lithothamnium that we may call it a “Lithothamnium atoll” rather than a
“coral atoll.”

The flat upper surface of the atoll-rim is in most places planed off nearly to
low-tide level, but it is veneered with a vigorous growth of a beautiful pink Litho-
thamnium which has been determined by Professor W. A. Setchell as Porolithon sp.
closely allied to P. craspedium. In most places this Lithothamnium forms irregu-
lar, more or less connected patches growing on the smooth, hard floor of the flat.

West of the main entrance to the lagoon, however, it grows in long, nearly parallel,
flat-topped, overarching ridges, all parallel with the line of the wave-fronts of the
breakers as they surge over the reef (fig. 3). These ridges are about 6 inches high
and from 6 inches to several feet in width and with channels of similar width
between them.
Lithothamnium grows in greater profusion over the reef-rim of Rose Atoll than
- in any other Pacific reef I have seen, but apart from the single species of pink Litho-
thamnium there are remarkably few organisms growing in the shallows of the reef-,
flat.. Occasionally we find a pale olive-green Porites, allied to P. lutea M. Ed. and
H., and there are a few small stocks of Favites or Symphyllia; but Acropora and
Pocillopora, which are the dominant forms in most breaker-washed reef-flats of
the Pacific, are practically absent from Rose Atoll, except at the extreme edges of
the atoll-rim fronting the lagoon or the sea, where a few stunted specimens of
these genera occur.
I did not find upon the Rose Atoll reef-rim a single specimen of branched
Acropora related to A. muricata, nor did I see Acropora hyacinthus, or A. leptocyathus,
which are dominant forms on the seaward edges of reefs elsewhere in Samoa.
Holothuria were fairly common, as were also small specimens of the giant clam
Tridacna, and among echini a few Cidaris and black, long-spined Diadema were
seen; and the bright-green seaweed Caulerpa was here and there found in the troughs
between the ridges of Lithothamnium; yet apart from the single species of pink
Lithothamnium, all other organisms were a negligible factor on the upper surface
of the atoll-rim.
It is important to observe that among the hundreds of loose boulders scattered
over the flat upper surface of the atoll-rim there are a few which still retain their
connection with the floor of the flat and project above it as “mushroom”’ rocks,
thus indicating either that the atoll-rim has risen 6 to 8 feet or that sea-level has
sunken to this extent. The evidence, however, tends to sustain the view that sea-
level has become lowered and not that the atoll-rim has risen, for there is no visible
tilting of the 1im; and moreover, all the volcanic islands of American Samoa are
surrounded by a bench of volcanic rock which is uniformly about 10 feet above
present high-tide level and is backed by sea-cliffs, thus suggesting that these islands
have remained stationary while sea-level has become lowered.

In this connection it may be of interest to observe that with the exception of
Mangareva, which is volcanic, and Makatea, which is elevated coral limestone, all
of the atolls of the Paumotus exhibit a bench of old limestone now several feet above
present high-tide level. It will also be recalled that David and Sweet, in their
