Carnegie Institution of Washington Publications 340:73-79. (1924)
ROSE ATOLL, AMERICAN SAMOA.
By AtFrepD GotpsBoroucH Mayor.

The late Commander Warren Jay Terhune, U.S. N., then governor of Samoa,
kindly invited me to accompany him on the U.S. S. Fortune to visit the little-known
Rose Atoll in S. lat. 14° 32’, W. long. 168° 12’, and we spent 24 hours upon this
island on June 5 and 6, 1920.

The island is an atoll, the lagoon being encircled by a narrow ring of limestone

_ composed chiefly of lithothamnium, which is everywhere nearly awash at low tide,
excepting on the northeast side, where there is a narrow entrance about 6 to 9 feet
in depth, out of which a current constantly flows. The ring of limestone which
surrounds the lagoon is quite uniformly about 500 yards in width, while the central
lagoon is about 2 miles wide and appears to have a maximum depth of not more
than 8 fathoms. There are only two small islets upon the atoll rim—Sand Islet
and Rose Islet. The official map of the atoll! is the U. S. hydrographic chart of
the Samoan Island, No. go, based largely on the survey of the United States explor-
ing expedition in 1839, and a map by Captain Rantzau (Journal des Museum
Godeffroy, Hamburg, 1873, Heft 1, p. 32). This shows Rose Islet as occupying the
entire width of the atoll rim, whereas at present it is confined to the inner half of the
width of the reef-rim. Moreover, this chart shows trees covering the entire area of
the islet, whereas at present only the southern half of the islet bears trees. The
chart states that Rose Islet is 33 feet high, but at present the land of the islet is
11 feet above high tide and the tallest trees, as measured by means of a sextant, are
about 80 feet high, and thus the total height of the landfall as seen from the ocean is
about 90 feet. Indeed, the domelike cluster of Pisonia grandis trees presents so
much the appearance of a hill (fig. 1) as seen from the ocean that a trading captain
who had sailed past the island but never landed upon it described it to me as a
mound of volcanic rock.

Rose Islet is at present about 240 yards SSW.-NNE., and about 200 yards
wide. The southern and southeastern half of the islet is densely covered with a
forest composed exclusively of Pisonia grandis trees, casting so complete a shade
that no other plants grow beneath them (fig. 5), save only a single coconut palm
which was probably planted by Governor Tilly’s party about 15 years ago. This
forest forms a nearly symmetrical dome, the leaves and branches on its confines
extending quite to the ground (fig. 4). The largest trees are near the southern
end of the grove. About 3 feet above the ground one of these trees had a girth of
25 feet 7 inches, and was about 80 feet high. The ground under these trees is
covered with a rich chocolate-colored humus which is of considerable depth near .
the southern end of the grove.

1 The first chart is that of L. C. D. Freycinet, made in 1819, at the time of the discovery of the island.
73
