78 PAPERS FROM THE DEPARTMENT OF MARINE BIOLOGY.
account of the geology of Funafuti (Funafuti Report, 1904, p. 84), conclude that
in this atoll there must have been either a land-elevation or a sea-sinking of at
least 9 to 10 feet. In 1913 we observed a sea-bench of about 3 feet above highest
tides around the volcanic, calcareous, and continental islands of Torres Straits,
and, according to W. J. Dakin (1919, Journ. Linnean Soc. London, vol. 34, p. 127)
an 8-foot bench is found throughout the Houtman Islands off the west coast of
Australia.
As there are fossil corals and Lithothamntum in the highest parts of the boul-
ders and mushroom-rocks on the rim of Rose Atoll, it appears that the climate was
tropical when the sea cut the now emerged 8-foot bench around all the volcanic
islands of American Samoa.
In the Funafuti boring the percentage of magnesium in the core ranged from
4 per cent at a depth of 4 feet to 16 per cent at 15 and 26 feet, below which it
declined to 3 per cent at a depth of 60 feet. Judd attributes this high percentage
of magnesium to the supposed leaching-out of calcium by the sea-water, but we now
know that the surface waters of the tropical Pacific are supersaturated in respect
to calcium carbonate and that calcium carbonate is therefore practically insoluble
, in this surface water. Judd admits that there-is much Lithothamnium in this upper
part of the boring, but unfortunately he made no analysis of the magnesium contents
of any lithothamnia at present growing upon the Funafuti Reef; and judging from
the conditions at Rose Atoll, I am inclined to believe that the magnesium in this
upper part of the Funafuti boring is due solely to its being largely composed of
Lithothamnium and not to any leaching-out of calcium carbonate. This conclusion
is supported also by the fact that in the Funafuti boring between 100 feet and 637
feet in depth the magnesium carbonate was nowhere greater than 5.4 per cent; yet,
if calcium leached out in water about 26 feet deep, why did it not leach out at these
greater depths, where conditions of temperature and hence of carbon dioxide are
more favorable for solution?
J. P. Couthouy (1844, Boston Journal of Natural History, vol. 4, p. 138) says
of Rose Atoll:
A number of boulders of volcanic rock are scattered over the sandy bottom of the lagoon, one
of about 20 pounds being found in about 4 feet of water. This rock was similar in appearance
and mineral structure to that constituting the neighboring groups of Samoa and Fiji.
Also, Wilkes (1852, Narrative of the U. S. Exploring Expedition, vol. 1, p.
155) states: “Some boulders of vesicular lava were seen on the coral reef of Rose
Atoll; they were from 20 to 200 pounds in weight and were found among blocks
of coral conglomerate.” After diligent search I was unable to find any volcanic
rock upon Rose Atoll, and it seems probable that Couthouy and Wilkes mistook |
- some dark-colored scoriaceous-looking, weather-worn limestone boulders for lava. |
|
|
