ef
74 PAPERS FROM THE DEPARTMENT OF MARINE BIOLOGY.
Apart from this grove of Pisonia trees and a half-dozen coconuts planted by
Governors Tilly and Terhune in 1902 and 1920, there are only two other species 4
of plants upon the islet. These have been identified by Professor William A.
Setchell, and are a pink-flowered creeping Boerhaavea diffusa with stems rarely more ;
than 3 feet long, and a thick-stemmed succulent Portulaca nov. sp. with small Hi
yellow flowers. Both of these plants grow fully exposed to the sun on the coral F
breccia and calcareous sand which surrounds the Pisonta grove, and none is found '
under the shade of the trees.
On the southeast side of Rose Islet the sand-beach is reduced to from 1 to ยง !
feet in width at low tide, and cliffs of coquina from ยง to 8 feet high front the sea i
(fig. 6). A few feet inland this rocky ledge rises to a height of about 11 feet above :
high-tide level. The Pisonia grove appears to be confined to this region of coquina
rock and does not extend to any great extent over the loose calcareous breccia which i
has been washed in upon the islet in time of storm. i
The tree-covered rocky center of the islet is composed of a coquina consisting
chiefly of wave-worn fragments of lithothamnium and also rare and occasional frag-
ments of broken coral, such as Favites, Porites, Symphyllia, Pocillopora, and still
more rarely Acropora. Embedded in it are many wave-worn half-valves of Tri-
dacna and gasteropod shells, and spines of Echinit such as Cidaris were found, as
was also the much corroded ulna and part of the skull of a small cetacean about the
size of a blackfish, the latter being embedded in the coquina about 8 feet above
high-tide level. A large amount of organic matter, dark brown in color and derived
from the decomposed roots of the Pisonia trees, permeates this coquina to a depth
of several feet. All of the fossils found embedded in the coquina are forms now
living on the reef-flat, which have simply been tossed on shore by the waves.
Professor C. B. Lipman found that this coquina in contact with the soil contains
12.05 per cent of phosphoric acid.
On the wave-washed southeastern shore of Rose Islet some modern beach-rock
has been formed and projects a few inches above high-tide level; but this is more
recent than the rocky matrix of the islet, which is now emerged about 11 feet
above high-tide level.
Sand Islet, which lies north of Rose Islet, is a mere accumulation of fragments
of lithothamnium, shells, and broken coral and is devoid of vegetation and only
about ยง feet above high-tide level. The sea must wash completely over it in time
of storm.
Several hundred boobies (Sula), most of which had half-grown young, were
nesting on the coral breccia of Rose Islet (fig. 7), while others had constructed :
nests of sticks high among the branches of the Pisonia trees. A few boatswain-
birds with eggs were also nesting in the trees, and several nearly grown young
of the noddy (4nous) were running over the ground, while adult noddies and
sooty terns visited the island at night. Frigate-birds were hovering over the island,
but none were nesting. Wilkes states that the noddies and sooty terns were
nesting on Rose Islet on October 7, 1839, and these species were still nesting when
Governor Terhune visited the island on January 10, 1920.
