ROSE ATOLL, AMERICAN SOMOA. 75
A small brown-gray rat was abundant and specimens of it were presented to
the Bishop Museum in Honolulu, where they were identified by Mr. J. F. G.
Stokes as being a Malayan form which appears to have become widely spread over
Polynesia, being possibly introduced by the early Polynesians themselves, who
esteemed them for food, and took much delight in hunting them for sport. Apart
from these very tame and abundant rats, the only other animals we observed were
a small brown, short-tailed lizard, identified by Dr. Thomas Barbour as Lepido-
dactylus lugubris (Dumeril and Bibron), and which is widely distributed over
Polynesia, and, the larva of a sphinx moth of the genus Ceélerio (Oken) feed-
ing upon the Portulaca.” A few gnats and an occasional house fly which may
have been introduced from the U. S. S. Fortune were the only other insects we
observed.
The upper surface of the atoll-rim which encircles the lagoon is a hard, smooth-
‘floored flat with but little loose sand upon it, and in most places it is awash at low
tide, although in others it projects as a hard, smooth ledge about a foot above low
tide-of the neap tides.
This hard, smooth upper surface of the atoll-rim, veneered everywhere by a
layer of lithothamnium, is characteristic of the wave-washed surface of offshore
and barrier reefs of the Pacific. The condition over a fringing reef is quite dif-
ferent, for here loose fragments are washed inward from the seaward edge and
backed up against the shore. Thus the whole surface, excepting only the wave-
washed outer edge, is covered with small, loose fragments which could not remain
upon an atoll-rim or a barrier reef, for they would soon be washed off into the
lagoon. The relatively loose nature of the material forming the shoreward parts
of fringing reefs at once distinguishes them from offshore reefs. Professor W. M.
Davis’s attempt, following Darwin, to institute a class of ‘offshore fringing reefs”
is not justified, the structure of the two forms of reefs being widely different.
As a matter of fact, reefs along Pacific shores are either barrier reefs or fringing
reefs, and one is never in any doubt in distinguishing the one from the other.
Hundreds of large blocks of limestone lie scattered over the flat, wave-washed
rim of Rose Atoll (fig. 2). These loose boulders are quite uniformly about 5.5
feet high, and only when tilted are they any higher (fig. 3). In addition to these
boulders there are a few others which are mushroom-shaped and still remain
attached to the floor of the atoll-rim, of which indeed they form an integral part.
One of the most remarkable of these mushroom-rocks lies to the eastward of Rose
Islet, and is supported upon so slender a pedicel that it would seem as if the next
storm must cause it to topple over. In many places over the flat, wave-washed
floor of the atoll-rim one finds remnants of pedicels which once supported ‘“mush-
rooms.” In addition, some of the boulders have become secondarily cemented to
the floor of the flat by the growth of lithothamnium around their bases. The
largest boulder we observed lay loosely upon the reef-flat east of Rose Islet and
was somewhat tilted by being jammed against another rock. It was 12 feet
5 inches long, 8 feet wide, and 7 feet 6 inches high, and as its specific gravity was
2.3, it apparently weighs 46 tons.
