76 PAPERS FROM THE DEPARTMENT OF MARINE BIOLOGY. ;
The appearance of these boulders supports the view that the atoll-rim was .
once about 6 or 8 feet higher, in respect to sea-level, than at present, and has 4
been cut down to present sea-level in recent times. The “negro heads” “kre simply :
mushroom rocks which have been completely undercut, so that they now lie loosely 4
upon the floor of the flat. 4
It can be seen that the surface of the present reef-flat consists chiefly of i
lithothamnium, a beautiful bright pink variety of which (Porolithon) forms a i
veritable veneer almost to the exclusion of other forms of life. Professor Alexander
H. Phillips made an analysis of this lithothamnium and found it to contain 74.4
per cent of calcium carbonate and 19.47 per cent magnesium carbonate. Also, 4g
rock from the solid floor of the atoll-rim west of the main entrance to the lagoon '
gave 83.86 per cent of calcium carbonate and 14.36 per cent of magnesium car- ;
bonate, while a large loose boulder from the same region consisted of 77.28 per
cent of calcium carbonate and 18.3 per cent of magnesium carbonate. Professor 4
C. B. Lipman found that the largest erratic boulder on the reef-flat east of Rose
Islet contained 79.5 per cent calcium carbonate and 14.54 per cent magnesium
carbonate. It will be recalled that Hégbom found the magnesium carbonate in
various species of Lithothamnium to range from 3.76 to 13.19 per cent. (See
J. W. Judd, Funifuti Report, 1904, p. 377.) Also, in 1917, F. W. Clarke and ~
W. C. Wheeler (U. S. Geological Survey, Professional Paper No. 102, p. 44)
analyzed 16 species of calcareous alge of the genera Lithothamnium, Archeo-
lithamnium, Lithophyllum, Amphiroa, Phymatolithon, and Goniolithon and found
the calcium carbonate to range from 73.63 to 88.11 per cent, while the magnesium
carbonate ranged from 10.93 to 25.17 per cent. The same authors (loc. cit.,
p. 11) found that in madreporarian reef-corals the calcium carbonate is more than
99 per cent and the magnesium carbonate less than 1 per cent; whereas in alcyo-
narian corals, exclusive of Heliopora, the magnesium carbonate ranges from 6.18
to 13.79 per cent, thus being comparable in amount with its proportion in litho- ,
thamnia.
It thus appears that the loose boulders lying upon the atoll-rim have the same
general chemical composition as the living lithothamnium of the rim itself, and are
remarkable in that they contain a large amount of magnesium. In fact, these
boulders are only remnants of the old rim, which was once about 6 or 8 feet above
sea-level, but has been almost entirely planed down to the level of the present
surface of the ocean, leaving only an occasional mushroom-rock or a pedicel as a
vestigial remnant of the old rim.
Inspection shows that the solid rock of the atoll-rim and also the boulders
lying upon it consist chiefly of Lithothamnium compacted into a mass of chalky
whiteness superficially resembling-dolomite and having a specific gravity of about
2.3, thus being higher than that of a pure coral limestone, the specific gravity of
which would range from 1.85 to 2. A pure dolomite containing 45.65 per cent of
magnesium carbonate should have a specific gravity of about 2.9.
There are a few fossil corals, chiefly Poctllopora, embedded in the rock of the
atoll-rim and the boulders, but the whole visible rock of the atoll consists so largely
