~ DEPARTMENT OF MARINE &
Ny WILDLIFE RESOURCES
a ww P.O. BOX 3730
SNS PAGO PAGO, AMERICAN SAMOA 96799
ge Proceedings of the International Seaweed Symposium 7:36-39. (1972)
S Ecology and Community Structure of Some Tropical
Reef Algae in Samoa
ArTHuR Lyon Daa
Department of Botany, Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C., U.S.A.
While benthic marirc algae other than encrusting forms are not often conspicuous in coral! reef
habitats, they frequently form complex associations with high species diversity but low biomass.
Data from the initial phase of a detailed ecological survey of the algae on the fringing reefs
around Tutuila, American Samoa, demonstrate the widespread occurrence of algal turfs, and
illustrate the interactions between species that help to maintain the algal communities. As-
sociations between algal species are often mutually beneficial, and create significant micro-
habitats. Algal communities also help to control substrate availability, and are themselves
altered by the types of substrate available. In spite of their low biomass, other algae must be
considered along with encrusting forms as significant components in the coral reef ecosystern.
eral description of the area and several en-
vironmental parameters were also noted for
INTRODUCTION :
each transect. This approach served to
Coral reefs are one of the world’s most characterize the major reef flat features and
complex and productive ecosystems and are _— populations on a repeatable basis within the
the only biological community known to limited time available. This paper will focus
produce massive geological formations. Al- on one aspect of the data from this program
though these reefs are widely distributed concerning the occurrence of algal turfs and
along coastal margins in tropical waters, the __ their role in the reef community structure.
diversity of coral reef forms and their com- Algal turfs can be defined as relatively
plexity have made it difficult to characterize | dense associations of one or more species of
ecological features that may be common to _ filamentous or foliose algae of small stature,
many reef areas and that may help to deter- _— attaining a height or thickness of | to 30 mm.
mine the nature and form of reef develop- Turfs are a frequently occurring algal fea-
ment. ture, particularly in tropical marine benthic
American Samoa, a small group of largely —_ habitats, and have been periodically noted
volcanic islands in the South Pacific (lat. and described (eg., 1, 3, 4, 6, 7). Generally,
14°S, long. 170°W), is typical of many island — however, attention has been concentrated on
areas in which coral reefs are a prominent _ the individual species within the turf, rather
local resource. As part ofalong-term survey than on the nature of the associations be-
and monitoring program, !() line transects tween species or the role of the turf commun-
were established across the intertidal and itv in the ecosystem.
high subtidal portions of the fringing reefs Turfs may be of particular significance in
around Tutuila Island and on nearby Aunuu _ tropical reef areas where other benthic algae
Island, representing a varicty of exposures are scarce. They may make a significant
and habitats. Additional sites were also contribution to productivity, aid in the con-
examined in detail. The initial surveys were  solidation of reef materials, and control sub-
established in January 1970, and most sta- strate availability. They are frequently
tions were repeated in July 1970. Collec- highly complex and diverse assemblages.
tions and rough quantitative estimates of | Species composition, community structure,
percent coverage were made for each 10m and habitat vary greatly, even within the
transect segment across the reef flat. Agen- same area. A much greater mass of data
( 36 )
