| ; George H. Balazs
: ‘ Hawaii Institute of Marine Biology
P.O. Box 1346
; Kaneohe, Hawaii 96744
7
Status of Sea Turtles in the Central Except for the Hawaiian Archipelago, sea turtle pop-
Pacific Ocean ulations in the Central Pacific Ocean and other areas
of Polynesia have not been systematically surveyed and
only limited information exists on their occurrence and
present survival status. This report will stmmarize and
; review what is known for a number of locations within
. the region, specifically the Hawaiian Archipelago, Line
Islands, Phoenix Islands, Cook Islands, American Sa-
moa, Western Samoa, Tokelau, Tuvalu, Wake, John-
ston, Howland, and Baker (Figure 1). While the in-
. formation for most of these areas is clearly inadequate,
there is nevertheless evidence to indicate that the num-
bers of turtles have declined within historical times.
At those islands with indigenous human populations,
the traditional conservation systems that served to pro-
tect turtles and other marine resources from overex-
ploitation have deteriorated considerably, and in some
cases vanished altogether. Three interrelated factors
contributing to this breakdown have been the intro-
duction of money economies, the decline of traditional
authority, and the imposition of new laws and practices
by colonial powers (Johannes 1978). In Polynesian so-
cieties, sea turtles are known to have played an im-
portant role in certain religious ceremonies, in my-
thology and art, in the production of implements and
medication, and as high protein food sources generally
reserved for chiefs and priests (Buck 1932; Emory 1933,
1947; Emory, Bonk, and Sinoto 1968; Kalakaua 1888;
Pukui and Elbert 1971).
Of the islands covered in this report, only the ones
under United States jurisdiction currently have gov-
ernmental regulations for sea turtles. Under the U.S.
Endangered Species Act, all sea turtles at these U.S.
areas are fully protected.
Status
Hawaiian Archipelago (United States)
Three species of sea turtles occur in Hawaiian waters,
; the green turtle, Chelonia mydas,the hawksbill, Eret-
243
