pensive food supply could not be resolved (Brandon a thorough investigation of the aggregations of sea tur-
1977, Balazs 1977, Anonymous 1978). tles occurring at such sites. This would include John-
ston Atoll, Kingman Reef, Wake, and Midway in the
Northwestern Hawaiian Islands. Any plans for the
Recommendations storage of nuclear wastes and other highly toxic sub-
stances on Pacific islands should include a careful eval-
The survival status of sea turtle populations occurring uation of the potential impact on both nesting and
in the areas covered by this report can be enhanced foraging aggregations of turtles.
cprouh implementation of the following recommen- 8. The Hawaiian Islands National Wildlife Refuge
should encompass a substantial amount of surrounding
1. Where appropriate, island governments should at- marine habitat to serve as a buffer against che forth-
tempt to reinforce the traditional conservation systems coming development of commercial fisheries.
that formerly served as a buffer for sea turtles. The
absence of governmental regulations for most of the
areas covered makes it imperative that some protective Acknowledgments
action be undertaken, but in close consultation with The research involved in preparing this report was jointly
native inhabitants. funded by the State of Hawaii, Office of the Marine
2. Known rookeries should be intensively monitored Affairs Coordinator, and the University of Hawaii Sea
during the peak period of at least 1, but preferably Grant College Program under Institution Grant Num-
several, nesting seasons to determine the number of bers 04—7-158-44129, 04-8-MOI-178 and
females present. As a minimum, this should include NA79AA-D-0085 (NOAA, Office of Sea Grant, De-
Rose Atoll, Enderbury, Birnie, Palmerston, Penrhyn, partment of Commerce). | would also like to gratefully
and the offshore islets of Namua, Nuutele, and Nuulua acknowledge the support and assistance of t he U.S.
in Western Samoa. Tagging with durable tags (see Bal- Fish and Wildlife Service, the National Marine Fish-
azs, this volume) should be carried out as an integral cries Service (Honolulu Laborarory), the Hawaii State
part of this work to gain some insight into the occur- Division of Fish and Game, the South Pacific Com-
rence of international migrations, hence shared usage mission, the Fourteenth U.S. Coast Guard District, the
of resources. Fifteenth Air Base Wing of the U.S. Air Force, and
the New York Zoological Society. Appreciation is
3. Based on the results of Recommendation 2, and also extended to Fisheries Departments of the Cook
in harmony with Recommendation 1, governments Islands and Western Samoa for their hospitality and
should be encouraged to designate certain islands and assistance during my visits in 1977. This is contribution
their surrounding waters as sea turtle sanctuaries. This number 578 of the Hawaii Institute of Marine Biology
would be a relatively uncomplicated undertaking in the and conference paper number UNIHI-SEAGRANT-
Phoenix group and Southern Line Islands where most CP-80—05 of the University of Hawaii Sea Grant Col-
of the islands are currently uninhabited and unused by lege Program.
man. From 11 to 14 December 1979 a workshop on sea
4. The illegal landings on uninhabited islands by for- turtles in the Pacific islands was to be jointly held by
eign fishing vessels should be investigated by an in- the South Pacific Commission and the U. S National
ternational task force. “Such violations constitute a Marine Fisheries Service in Noumea, New Caledonia.
worldwide problem and usually involve the theft and
destruction of natural resources that include sea tur- Literature Cited
tles. Allen, R.
5. A comprehensive appraisal should be undertaken 1975. Marine Parks: the Cinderella of conservation. New
of the 9-year-old hawksbill hatchery in Western Sa- A Seems 14 August:366-69.
moa. The results of this little-known conservation ex- merson, A. D. ;
periment may be of considerable value to worldwide 1971. The natura history of reach nN On R Shoals. x on
efforts aimed at saving endangered hawksbill popula- 15 0.1303 awatian lslands. Af Nea rED OUEE
tons. Anonymous
6. The predation on hatchlings by rats at Rose Atoll 1972. Cook Islands Marine and Atoll Development Agency
should be quantified and control methods imple- aaa atoll production system. Aqua-
mented if the conditions warrant. 1974. Fisheries Division annual report 3. Turtle Project.
7. Military agencies of the U.S. government admin- Government of Western Samoa, Apia.
istering islands covered in this report should undertake 1975. Fisheries Division annual report—Turtle Project.
250 GEORGE H. BALAZS
